ianseinioeiian,The Project Gutenberg EBook of War and Peace, by Leo TolstoyThis eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with almostno restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use itunder the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with thiseBook or online at www.gutenberg.orgTitle: War and PeaceAuthor: Leo TolstoyTranslators: Louise and Aylmer MaudePosting Date: January 10, 2009 [EBook #2600]Last Updated: March 15, 2013Language: English*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WAR AND PEACE ***An Anonymous Volunteer, and David WidgerWAR AND PEACEBy Leo Tolstoy/TolstoiCONTENTSBOOK ONE: 1805CHAPTER ICHAPTER IICHAPTER IIICHAPTER IVCHAPTER VCHAPTER VICHAPTER VIICHAPTER VIIICHAPTER IXCHAPTER XCHAPTER XICHAPTER XIICHAPTER XIIICHAPTER XIVCHAPTER XVCHAPTER XVICHAPTER XVIICHAPTER XVIIICHAPTER XIXCHAPTER XXCHAPTER XXICHAPTER XXIICHAPTER XXIIICHAPTER XXIVCHAPTER XXVCHAPTER XXVICHAPTER XXVIICHAPTER XXVIIIBOOK TWO: 1805CHAPTER ICHAPTER IICHAPTER IIICHAPTER IVCHAPTER VCHAPTER VICHAPTER VIICHAPTER VIIICHAPTER IXCHAPTER XCHAPTER XICHAPTER XIICHAPTER XIIICHAPTER XIVCHAPTER XVCHAPTER XVICHAPTER XVIICHAPTER XVIIICHAPTER XIXCHAPTER XXCHAPTER XXIBOOK THREE: 1805CHAPTER ICHAPTER IICHAPTER IIICHAPTER IVCHAPTER VCHAPTER VICHAPTER VIICHAPTER VIIICHAPTER IXCHAPTER XCHAPTER XICHAPTER XIICHAPTER XIIICHAPTER XIVCHAPTER XVCHAPTER XVICHAPTER XVIICHAPTER XVIIICHAPTER XIXBOOK FOUR: 1806CHAPTER ICHAPTER IICHAPTER IIICHAPTER IVCHAPTER VCHAPTER VICHAPTER VIICHAPTER VIIICHAPTER IXCHAPTER XCHAPTER XICHAPTER XIICHAPTER XIIICHAPTER XIVCHAPTER XVCHAPTER XVIBOOK FIVE: 1806 - 07CHAPTER ICHAPTER IICHAPTER IIICHAPTER IVCHAPTER VCHAPTER VICHAPTER VIICHAPTER VIIICHAPTER IXCHAPTER XCHAPTER XICHAPTER XIICHAPTER XIIICHAPTER XIVCHAPTER XVCHAPTER XVICHAPTER XVIICHAPTER XVIIICHAPTER XIXCHAPTER XXCHAPTER XXICHAPTER XXIIBOOK SIX: 1808 - 10CHAPTER ICHAPTER IICHAPTER IIICHAPTER IVCHAPTER VCHAPTER VICHAPTER VIICHAPTER VIIICHAPTER IXCHAPTER XCHAPTER XICHAPTER XIICHAPTER XIIICHAPTER XIVCHAPTER XVCHAPTER XVICHAPTER XVIICHAPTER XVIIICHAPTER XIXCHAPTER XXCHAPTER XXICHAPTER XXIICHAPTER XXIIICHAPTER XXIVCHAPTER XXVCHAPTER XXVIBOOK SEVEN: 1810 - 11CHAPTER ICHAPTER IICHAPTER IIICHAPTER IVCHAPTER VCHAPTER VICHAPTER VIICHAPTER VIIICHAPTER IXCHAPTER XCHAPTER XICHAPTER XIICHAPTER XIIIBOOK EIGHT: 1811 - 12CHAPTER ICHAPTER IICHAPTER IIICHAPTER IVCHAPTER VCHAPTER VICHAPTER VIICHAPTER VIIICHAPTER IXCHAPTER XCHAPTER XICHAPTER XIICHAPTER XIIICHAPTER XIVCHAPTER XVCHAPTER XVICHAPTER XVIICHAPTER XVIIICHAPTER XIXCHAPTER XXCHAPTER XXICHAPTER XXIIBOOK NINE: 1812CHAPTER ICHAPTER IICHAPTER IIICHAPTER IVCHAPTER VCHAPTER VICHAPTER VIICHAPTER VIIICHAPTER IXCHAPTER XCHAPTER XICHAPTER XIICHAPTER XIIICHAPTER XIVCHAPTER XVCHAPTER XVICHAPTER XVIICHAPTER XVIIICHAPTER XIXCHAPTER XXCHAPTER XXICHAPTER XXIICHAPTER XXIIIBOOK TEN: 1812CHAPTER ICHAPTER IICHAPTER IIICHAPTER IVCHAPTER VCHAPTER VICHAPTER VIICHAPTER VIIICHAPTER IXCHAPTER XCHAPTER XICHAPTER XIICHAPTER XIIICHAPTER XIVCHAPTER XVCHAPTER XVICHAPTER XVIICHAPTER XVIIICHAPTER XIXCHAPTER XXCHAPTER XXICHAPTER XXIICHAPTER XXIIICHAPTER XXIVCHAPTER XXVCHAPTER XXVICHAPTER XXVIICHAPTER XXVIIICHAPTER XXIXCHAPTER XXXCHAPTER XXXICHAPTER XXXIICHAPTER XXXIIICHAPTER XXXIVCHAPTER XXXVCHAPTER XXXVICHAPTER XXXVIICHAPTER XXXVIIICHAPTER XXXIXBOOK ELEVEN: 1812CHAPTER ICHAPTER IICHAPTER IIICHAPTER IVCHAPTER VCHAPTER VICHAPTER VIICHAPTER VIIICHAPTER IXCHAPTER XCHAPTER XICHAPTER XIICHAPTER XIIICHAPTER XIVCHAPTER XVCHAPTER XVICHAPTER XVIICHAPTER XVIIICHAPTER XIXCHAPTER XXCHAPTER XXICHAPTER XXIICHAPTER XXIIICHAPTER XXIVCHAPTER XXVCHAPTER XXVICHAPTER XXVIICHAPTER XXVIIICHAPTER XXIXCHAPTER XXXCHAPTER XXXICHAPTER XXXIICHAPTER XXXIIICHAPTER XXXIVBOOK TWELVE: 1812CHAPTER ICHAPTER IICHAPTER IIICHAPTER IVCHAPTER VCHAPTER VICHAPTER VIICHAPTER VIIICHAPTER IXCHAPTER XCHAPTER XICHAPTER XIICHAPTER XIIICHAPTER XIVCHAPTER XVCHAPTER XVIBOOK THIRTEEN: 1812CHAPTER ICHAPTER IICHAPTER IIICHAPTER IVCHAPTER VCHAPTER VICHAPTER VIICHAPTER VIIICHAPTER IXCHAPTER XCHAPTER XICHAPTER XIICHAPTER XIIICHAPTER XIVCHAPTER XVCHAPTER XVICHAPTER XVIICHAPTER XVIIICHAPTER XIXBOOK FOURTEEN: 1812CHAPTER ICHAPTER IICHAPTER IIICHAPTER IVCHAPTER VCHAPTER VICHAPTER VIICHAPTER VIIICHAPTER IXCHAPTER XCHAPTER XICHAPTER XIICHAPTER XIIICHAPTER XIVCHAPTER XVCHAPTER XVICHAPTER XVIICHAPTER XVIIICHAPTER XIXBOOK FIFTEEN: 1812 - 13CHAPTER ICHAPTER IICHAPTER IIICHAPTER IVCHAPTER VCHAPTER VICHAPTER VIICHAPTER VIIICHAPTER IXCHAPTER XCHAPTER XICHAPTER XIICHAPTER XIIICHAPTER XIVCHAPTER XVCHAPTER XVICHAPTER XVIICHAPTER XVIIICHAPTER XIXCHAPTER XXFIRST EPILOGUE: 1813 - 20CHAPTER ICHAPTER IICHAPTER IIICHAPTER IVCHAPTER VCHAPTER VICHAPTER VIICHAPTER VIIICHAPTER IXCHAPTER XCHAPTER XICHAPTER XIICHAPTER XIIICHAPTER XIVCHAPTER XVCHAPTER XVISECOND EPILOGUECHAPTER ICHAPTER IICHAPTER IIICHAPTER IVCHAPTER VCHAPTER VICHAPTER VIICHAPTER VIIICHAPTER IXCHAPTER XCHAPTER XICHAPTER XIIBOOK ONE: 1805CHAPTER I"Well, Prince, so Genoa and Lucca are now just family estates of theBuonapartes. But I warn you, if you don't tell me that this means war,if you still try to defend the infamies and horrors perpetrated by thatAntichrist--I really believe he is Antichrist--I will have nothing moreto do with you and you are no longer my friend, no longer my 'faithfulslave,' as you call yourself! But how do you do? I see I have frightenedyou--sit down and tell me all the news."It was in July, 1805, and the speaker was the well-known Anna PavlovnaScherer, maid of honor and favorite of the Empress Marya Fedorovna. Withthese words she greeted Prince Vasili Kuragin, a man of high rank andimportance, who was the first to arrive at her reception. Anna Pavlovnahad had a cough for some days. She was, as she said, suffering from lagrippe; grippe being then a new word in St. Petersburg, used only by theelite.All her invitations without exception, written in French, and deliveredby a scarlet-liveried footman that morning, ran as follows:"If you have nothing better to do, Count (or Prince), and if theprospect of spending an evening with a poor invalid is not too terrible,I shall be very charmed to see you tonight between 7 and 10--AnnetteScherer.""Heavens! what a virulent attack!" replied the prince, not in the leastdisconcerted by this reception. He had just entered, wearing anembroidered court uniform, knee breeches, and shoes, and had stars onhis breast and a serene expression on his flat face. He spoke in thatrefined French in which our grandfathers not only spoke but thought, andwith the gentle, patronizing intonation natural to a man of importancewho had grown old in society and at court. He went up to Anna Pavlovna,kissed her hand, presenting to her his bald, scented, and shining head,and complacently seated himself on the sofa."First of all, dear friend, tell me how you are. Set your friend's mindat rest," said he without altering his tone, beneath the politeness andaffected sympathy of which indifference and even irony could bediscerned."Can one be well while suffering morally? Can one be calm in times likethese if one has any feeling?" said Anna Pavlovna. "You are staying thewhole evening, I hope?""And the fete at the English ambassador's? Today is Wednesday. I mustput in an appearance there," said the prince. "My daughter is coming forme to take me there.""I thought today's fete had been canceled. I confess all thesefestivities and fireworks are becoming wearisome.""If they had known that you wished it, the entertainment would have beenput off," said the prince, who, like a wound-up clock, by force of habitsaid things he did not even wish to be believed."Don't tease! Well, and what has been decided about Novosiltsev'sdispatch? You know everything.""What can one say about it?" replied the prince in a cold, listlesstone. "What has been decided? They have decided that Buonaparte hasburnt his boats, and I believe that we are ready to burn ours."Prince Vasili always spoke languidly, like an actor repeating a stalepart. Anna Pavlovna Scherer on the contrary, despite her forty years,overflowed with animation and impulsiveness. To be an enthusiast hadbecome her social vocation and, sometimes even when she did not feellike it, she became enthusiastic in order not to disappoint theexpectations of those who knew her. The subdued smile which, though itdid not suit her faded features, always played round her lips expressed,as in a spoiled child, a continual consciousness of her charming defect,which she neither wished, nor could, nor considered it necessary, tocorrect.In the midst of a conversation on political matters Anna Pavlovna burstout:"Oh, don't speak to me of Austria. Perhaps I don't understand things,but Austria never has wished, and does not wish, for war. She isbetraying us! Russia alone must save Europe. Our gracious sovereignrecognizes his high vocation and will be true to it. That is the onething I have faith in! Our good and wonderful sovereign has to performthe noblest role on earth, and he is so virtuous and noble that God willnot forsake him. He will fulfill his vocation and crush the hydra ofrevolution, which has become more terrible than ever in the person ofthis murderer and villain! We alone must avenge the blood of the justone.... Whom, I ask you, can we rely on?... England with her commercialspirit will not and cannot understand the Emperor Alexander's loftinessof soul. She has refused to evacuate Malta. She wanted to find, andstill seeks, some secret motive in our actions. What answer didNovosiltsev get? None. The English have not understood and cannotunderstand the self-abnegation of our Emperor who wants nothing forhimself, but only desires the good of mankind. And what have theypromised? Nothing! And what little they have promised they will notperform! Prussia has always declared that Buonaparte is invincible, andthat all Europe is powerless before him.... And I don't believe a wordthat Hardenburg says, or Haugwitz either. This famous Prussianneutrality is just a trap. I have faith only in God and the loftydestiny of our adored monarch. He will save Europe!"She suddenly paused, smiling at her own impetuosity."I think," said the prince with a smile, "that if you had been sentinstead of our dear Wintzingerode you would have captured the King ofPrussia's consent by assault. You are so eloquent. Will you give me acup of tea?""In a moment. A propos," she added, becoming calm again, "I am expectingtwo very interesting men tonight, le Vicomte de Mortemart, who isconnected with the Montmorencys through the Rohans, one of the bestFrench families. He is one of the genuine emigres, the good ones. Andalso the Abbe Morio. Do you know that profound thinker? He has beenreceived by the Emperor. Had you heard?""I shall be delighted to meet them," said the prince. "But tell me," headded with studied carelessness as if it had only just occurred to him,though the question he was about to ask was the chief motive of hisvisit, "is it true that the Dowager Empress wants Baron Funke to beappointed first secretary at Vienna? The baron by all accounts is a poorcreature."Prince Vasili wished to obtain this post for his son, but others weretrying through the Dowager Empress Marya Fedorovna to secure it for thebaron.Anna Pavlovna almost closed her eyes to indicate that neither she noranyone else had a right to criticize what the Empress desired or waspleased with."Baron Funke has been recommended to the Dowager Empress by her sister,"was all she said, in a dry and mournful tone.As she named the Empress, Anna Pavlovna's face suddenly assumed anexpression of profound and sincere devotion and respect mingled withsadness, and this occurred every time she mentioned her illustriouspatroness. She added that Her Majesty had deigned to show Baron Funkebeaucoup d'estime, and again her face clouded over with sadness.The prince was silent and looked indifferent. But, with the womanly andcourtierlike quickness and tact habitual to her, Anna Pavlovna wishedboth to rebuke him (for daring to speak as he had done of a manrecommended to the Empress) and at the same time to console him, so shesaid:"Now about your family. Do you know that since your daughter came outeveryone has been enraptured by her? They say she is amazinglybeautiful."The prince bowed to signify his respect and gratitude."I often think," she continued after a short pause, drawing nearer tothe prince and smiling amiably at him as if to show that political andsocial topics were ended and the time had come for intimateconversation--"I often think how unfairly sometimes the joys of life aredistributed. Why has fate given you two such splendid children? I don'tspeak of Anatole, your youngest. I don't like him," she added in a toneadmitting of no rejoinder and raising her eyebrows. "Two such charmingchildren. And really you appreciate them less than anyone, and so youdon't deserve to have them."And she smiled her ecstatic smile."I can't help it," said the prince. "Lavater would have said I lack thebump of paternity.""Don't joke; I mean to have a serious talk with you. Do you know I amdissatisfied with your younger son? Between ourselves" (and her faceassumed its melancholy expression), "he was mentioned at Her Majesty'sand you were pitied...."The prince answered nothing, but she looked at him significantly,awaiting a reply. He frowned."What would you have me do?" he said at last. "You know I did all afather could for their education, and they have both turned out fools.Hippolyte is at least a quiet fool, but Anatole is an active one. Thatis the only difference between them." He said this smiling in a way morenatural and animated than usual, so that the wrinkles round his mouthvery clearly revealed something unexpectedly coarse and unpleasant."And why are children born to such men as you? If you were not a fatherthere would be nothing I could reproach you with," said Anna Pavlovna,looking up pensively."I am your faithful slave and to you alone I can confess that mychildren are the bane of my life. It is the cross I have to bear. Thatis how I explain it to myself. It can't be helped!"He said no more, but expressed his resignation to cruel fate by agesture. Anna Pavlovna meditated."Have you never thought of marrying your prodigal son Anatole?" sheasked. "They say old maids have a mania for matchmaking, and though Idon't feel that weakness in myself as yet, I know a little person who isvery unhappy with her father. She is a relation of yours, Princess MaryBolkonskaya."Prince Vasili did not reply, though, with the quickness of memory andperception befitting a man of the world, he indicated by a movement ofthe head that he was considering this information."Do you know," he said at last, evidently unable to check the sadcurrent of his thoughts, "that Anatole is costing me forty thousandrubles a year? And," he went on after a pause, "what will it be in fiveyears, if he goes on like this?" Presently he added: "That's what wefathers have to put up with.... Is this princess of yours rich?""Her father is very rich and stingy. He lives in the country. He is thewell-known Prince Bolkonski who had to retire from the army under thelate Emperor, and was nicknamed 'the King of Prussia.' He is very cleverbut eccentric, and a bore. The poor girl is very unhappy. She has abrother; I think you know him, he married Lise Meinen lately. He is anaide-de-camp of Kutuzov's and will be here tonight.""Listen, dear Annette," said the prince, suddenly taking Anna Pavlovna'shand and for some reason drawing it downwards. "Arrange that affair forme and I shall always be your most devoted slave-slafe with an f, as avillage elder of mine writes in his reports. She is rich and of goodfamily and that's all I want."And with the familiarity and easy grace peculiar to him, he raised themaid of honor's hand to his lips, kissed it, and swung it to and fro ashe lay back in his armchair, looking in another direction."Attendez," said Anna Pavlovna, reflecting, "I'll speak to Lise, youngBolkonski's wife, this very evening, and perhaps the thing can bearranged. It shall be on your family's behalf that I'll start myapprenticeship as old maid."CHAPTER IIAnna Pavlovna's drawing room was gradually filling. The highestPetersburg society was assembled there: people differing widely in ageand character but alike in the social circle to which they belonged.Prince Vasili's daughter, the beautiful Helene, came to take her fatherto the ambassador's entertainment; she wore a ball dress and her badgeas maid of honor. The youthful little Princess Bolkonskaya, known as lafemme la plus seduisante de Petersbourg, * was also there. She had beenmarried during the previous winter, and being pregnant did not go to anylarge gatherings, but only to small receptions. Prince Vasili's son,Hippolyte, had come with Mortemart, whom he introduced. The Abbe Morioand many others had also come.* The most fascinating woman in Petersburg.To each new arrival Anna Pavlovna said, "You have not yet seen my aunt,"or "You do not know my aunt?" and very gravely conducted him or her to alittle old lady, wearing large bows of ribbon in her cap, who had comesailing in from another room as soon as the guests began to arrive; andslowly turning her eyes from the visitor to her aunt, Anna Pavlovnamentioned each one's name and then left them.Each visitor performed the ceremony of greeting this old aunt whom notone of them knew, not one of them wanted to know, and not one of themcared about; Anna Pavlovna observed these greetings with mournful andsolemn interest and silent approval. The aunt spoke to each of them inthe same words, about their health and her own, and the health of HerMajesty, "who, thank God, was better today." And each visitor, thoughpoliteness prevented his showing impatience, left the old woman with asense of relief at having performed a vexatious duty and did not returnto her the whole evening.The young Princess Bolkonskaya had brought some work in a gold-embroidered velvet bag. Her pretty little upper lip, on which a delicatedark down was just perceptible, was too short for her teeth, but itlifted all the more sweetly, and was especially charming when sheoccasionally drew it down to meet the lower lip. As is always the casewith a thoroughly attractive woman, her defect--the shortness of herupper lip and her half-open mouth--seemed to be her own special andpeculiar form of beauty. Everyone brightened at the sight of this prettyyoung woman, so soon to become a mother, so full of life and health, andcarrying her burden so lightly. Old men and dull dispirited young oneswho looked at her, after being in her company and talking to her alittle while, felt as if they too were becoming, like her, full of lifeand health. All who talked to her, and at each word saw her bright smileand the constant gleam of her white teeth, thought that they were in aspecially amiable mood that day.The little princess went round the table with quick, short, swayingsteps, her workbag on her arm, and gaily spreading out her dress satdown on a sofa near the silver samovar, as if all she was doing was apleasure to herself and to all around her. "I have brought my work,"said she in French, displaying her bag and addressing all present."Mind, Annette, I hope you have not played a wicked trick on me," sheadded, turning to her hostess. "You wrote that it was to be quite asmall reception, and just see how badly I am dressed." And she spreadout her arms to show her short-waisted, lace-trimmed, dainty gray dress,girdled with a broad ribbon just below the breast."Soyez tranquille, Lise, you will always be prettier than anyone else,"replied Anna Pavlovna."You know," said the princess in the same tone of voice and still inFrench, turning to a general, "my husband is deserting me? He is goingto get himself killed. Tell me what this wretched war is for?" sheadded, addressing Prince Vasili, and without waiting for an answer sheturned to speak to his daughter, the beautiful Helene."What a delightful woman this little princess is!" said Prince Vasili toAnna Pavlovna.One of the next arrivals was a stout, heavily built young man withclose-cropped hair, spectacles, the light-colored breeches fashionableat that time, a very high ruffle, and a brown dress coat. This stoutyoung man was an illegitimate son of Count Bezukhov, a well-knowngrandee of Catherine's time who now lay dying in Moscow. The young manhad not yet entered either the military or civil service, as he had onlyjust returned from abroad where he had been educated, and this was hisfirst appearance in society. Anna Pavlovna greeted him with the nod sheaccorded to the lowest hierarchy in her drawing room. But in spite ofthis lowest-grade greeting, a look of anxiety and fear, as at the sightof something too large and unsuited to the place, came over her facewhen she saw Pierre enter. Though he was certainly rather bigger thanthe other men in the room, her anxiety could only have reference to theclever though shy, but observant and natural, expression whichdistinguished him from everyone else in that drawing room."It is very good of you, Monsieur Pierre, to come and visit a poorinvalid," said Anna Pavlovna, exchanging an alarmed glance with her auntas she conducted him to her.Pierre murmured something unintelligible, and continued to look round asif in search of something. On his way to the aunt he bowed to the littleprincess with a pleased smile, as to an intimate acquaintance.Anna Pavlovna's alarm was justified, for Pierre turned away from theaunt without waiting to hear her speech about Her Majesty's health. AnnaPavlovna in dismay detained him with the words: "Do you know the AbbeMorio? He is a most interesting man.""Yes, I have heard of his scheme for perpetual peace, and it is veryinteresting but hardly feasible.""You think so?" rejoined Anna Pavlovna in order to say something and getaway to attend to her duties as hostess. But Pierre now committed areverse act of impoliteness. First he had left a lady before she hadfinished speaking to him, and now he continued to speak to another whowished to get away. With his head bent, and his big feet spread apart,he began explaining his reasons for thinking the abbe's plan chimerical."We will talk of it later," said Anna Pavlovna with a smile.And having got rid of this young man who did not know how to behave, sheresumed her duties as hostess and continued to listen and watch, readyto help at any point where the conversation might happen to flag. As theforeman of a spinning mill, when he has set the hands to work, goesround and notices here a spindle that has stopped or there one thatcreaks or makes more noise than it should, and hastens to check themachine or set it in proper motion, so Anna Pavlovna moved about herdrawing room, approaching now a silent, now a too-noisy group, and by aword or slight rearrangement kept the conversational machine in steady,proper, and regular motion. But amid these cares her anxiety aboutPierre was evident. She kept an anxious watch on him when he approachedthe group round Mortemart to listen to what was being said there, andagain when he passed to another group whose center was the abbe.Pierre had been educated abroad, and this reception at Anna Pavlovna'swas the first he had attended in Russia. He knew that all theintellectual lights of Petersburg were gathered there and, like a childin a toyshop, did not know which way to look, afraid of missing anyclever conversation that was to be heard. Seeing the self-confident andrefined expression on the faces of those present he was always expectingto hear something very profound. At last he came up to Morio. Here theconversation seemed interesting and he stood waiting for an opportunityto express his own views, as young people are fond of doing.CHAPTER IIIAnna Pavlovna's reception was in full swing. The spindles hummedsteadily and ceaselessly on all sides. With the exception of the aunt,beside whom sat only one elderly lady, who with her thin careworn facewas rather out of place in this brilliant society, the whole company hadsettled into three groups. One, chiefly masculine, had formed round theabbe. Another, of young people, was grouped round the beautiful PrincessHelene, Prince Vasili's daughter, and the little Princess Bolkonskaya,very pretty and rosy, though rather too plump for her age. The thirdgroup was gathered round Mortemart and Anna Pavlovna.The vicomte was a nice-looking young man with soft features and polishedmanners, who evidently considered himself a celebrity but out ofpoliteness modestly placed himself at the disposal of the circle inwhich he found himself. Anna Pavlovna was obviously serving him up as atreat to her guests. As a clever maitre d'hotel serves up as a speciallychoice delicacy a piece of meat that no one who had seen it in thekitchen would have cared to eat, so Anna Pavlovna served up to herguests, first the vicomte and then the abbe, as peculiarly choicemorsels. The group about Mortemart immediately began discussing themurder of the Duc d'Enghien. The vicomte said that the Duc d'Enghien hadperished by his own magnanimity, and that there were particular reasonsfor Buonaparte's hatred of him."Ah, yes! Do tell us all about it, Vicomte," said Anna Pavlovna, with apleasant feeling that there was something a la Louis XV in the sound ofthat sentence: "Contez nous cela, Vicomte."The vicomte bowed and smiled courteously in token of his willingness tocomply. Anna Pavlovna arranged a group round him, inviting everyone tolisten to his tale."The vicomte knew the duc personally," whispered Anna Pavlovna to one ofthe guests. "The vicomte is a wonderful raconteur," said she to another."How evidently he belongs to the best society," said she to a third; andthe vicomte was served up to the company in the choicest and mostadvantageous style, like a well-garnished joint of roast beef on a hotdish.The vicomte wished to begin his story and gave a subtle smile."Come over here, Helene, dear," said Anna Pavlovna to the beautifulyoung princess who was sitting some way off, the center of anothergroup.The princess smiled. She rose with the same unchanging smile with whichshe had first entered the room--the smile of a perfectly beautifulwoman. With a slight rustle of her white dress trimmed with moss andivy, with a gleam of white shoulders, glossy hair, and sparklingdiamonds, she passed between the men who made way for her, not lookingat any of them but smiling on all, as if graciously allowing each theprivilege of admiring her beautiful figure and shapely shoulders, back,and bosom--which in the fashion of those days were very much exposed--and she seemed to bring the glamour of a ballroom with her as she movedtoward Anna Pavlovna. Helene was so lovely that not only did she notshow any trace of coquetry, but on the contrary she even appeared shy ofher unquestionable and all too victorious beauty. She seemed to wish,but to be unable, to diminish its effect."How lovely!" said everyone who saw her; and the vicomte lifted hisshoulders and dropped his eyes as if startled by something extraordinarywhen she took her seat opposite and beamed upon him also with herunchanging smile."Madame, I doubt my ability before such an audience," said he, smilinglyinclining his head.The princess rested her bare round arm on a little table and considereda reply unnecessary. She smilingly waited. All the time the story wasbeing told she sat upright, glancing now at her beautiful round arm,altered in shape by its pressure on the table, now at her still morebeautiful bosom, on which she readjusted a diamond necklace. From timeto time she smoothed the folds of her dress, and whenever the storyproduced an effect she glanced at Anna Pavlovna, at once adopted justthe expression she saw on the maid of honor's face, and again relapsedinto her radiant smile.The little princess had also left the tea table and followed Helene."Wait a moment, I'll get my work.... Now then, what are you thinkingof?" she went on, turning to Prince Hippolyte. "Fetch me my workbag."There was a general movement as the princess, smiling and talkingmerrily to everyone at once, sat down and gaily arranged herself in herseat."Now I am all right," she said, and asking the vicomte to begin, shetook up her work.Prince Hippolyte, having brought the workbag, joined the circle andmoving a chair close to hers seated himself beside her.Le charmant Hippolyte was surprising by his extraordinary resemblance tohis beautiful sister, but yet more by the fact that in spite of thisresemblance he was exceedingly ugly. His features were like hissister's, but while in her case everything was lit up by a joyous, self-satisfied, youthful, and constant smile of animation, and by thewonderful classic beauty of her figure, his face on the contrary wasdulled by imbecility and a constant expression of sullen self-confidence, while his body was thin and weak. His eyes, nose, and mouthall seemed puckered into a vacant, wearied grimace, and his arms andlegs always fell into unnatural positions."It's not going to be a ghost story?" said he, sitting down beside theprincess and hastily adjusting his lorgnette, as if without thisinstrument he could not begin to speak."Why no, my dear fellow," said the astonished narrator, shrugging hisshoulders."Because I hate ghost stories," said Prince Hippolyte in a tone whichshowed that he only understood the meaning of his words after he haduttered them.He spoke with such self-confidence that his hearers could not be surewhether what he said was very witty or very stupid. He was dressed in adark-green dress coat, knee breeches of the color of cuisse de nympheeffrayee, as he called it, shoes, and silk stockings.The vicomte told his tale very neatly. It was an anecdote, then current,to the effect that the Duc d'Enghien had gone secretly to Paris to visitMademoiselle George; that at her house he came upon Bonaparte, who alsoenjoyed the famous actress' favors, and that in his presence Napoleonhappened to fall into one of the fainting fits to which he was subject,and was thus at the duc's mercy. The latter spared him, and thismagnanimity Bonaparte subsequently repaid by death.The story was very pretty and interesting, especially at the point wherethe rivals suddenly recognized one another; and the ladies lookedagitated."Charming!" said Anna Pavlovna with an inquiring glance at the littleprincess."Charming!" whispered the little princess, sticking the needle into herwork as if to testify that the interest and fascination of the storyprevented her from going on with it.The vicomte appreciated this silent praise and smiling gratefullyprepared to continue, but just then Anna Pavlovna, who had kept awatchful eye on the young man who so alarmed her, noticed that he wastalking too loudly and vehemently with the abbe, so she hurried to therescue. Pierre had managed to start a conversation with the abbe aboutthe balance of power, and the latter, evidently interested by the youngman's simple-minded eagerness, was explaining his pet theory. Both weretalking and listening too eagerly and too naturally, which was why AnnaPavlovna disapproved."The means are... the balance of power in Europe and the rights of thepeople," the abbe was saying. "It is only necessary for one powerfulnation like Russia--barbaric as she is said to be--to place herselfdisinterestedly at the head of an alliance having for its object themaintenance of the balance of power of Europe, and it would save theworld!""But how are you to get that balance?" Pierre was beginning.At that moment Anna Pavlovna came up and, looking severely at Pierre,asked the Italian how he stood Russian climate. The Italian's faceinstantly changed and assumed an offensively affected, sugaryexpression, evidently habitual to him when conversing with women."I am so enchanted by the brilliancy of the wit and culture of thesociety, more especially of the feminine society, in which I have hadthe honor of being received, that I have not yet had time to think ofthe climate," said he.Not letting the abbe and Pierre escape, Anna Pavlovna, the moreconveniently to keep them under observation, brought them into thelarger circle.CHAPTER IVJust then another visitor entered the drawing room: Prince AndrewBolkonski, the little princess' husband. He was a very handsome youngman, of medium height, with firm, clearcut features. Everything abouthim, from his weary, bored expression to his quiet, measured step,offered a most striking contrast to his quiet, little wife. It wasevident that he not only knew everyone in the drawing room, but hadfound them to be so tiresome that it wearied him to look at or listen tothem. And among all these faces that he found so tedious, none seemed tobore him so much as that of his pretty wife. He turned away from herwith a grimace that distorted his handsome face, kissed Anna Pavlovna'shand, and screwing up his eyes scanned the whole company."You are off to the war, Prince?" said Anna Pavlovna."General Kutuzov," said Bolkonski, speaking French and stressing thelast syllable of the general's name like a Frenchman, "has been pleasedto take me as an aide-de-camp....""And Lise, your wife?""She will go to the country.""Are you not ashamed to deprive us of your charming wife?""Andre," said his wife, addressing her husband in the same coquettishmanner in which she spoke to other men, "the vicomte has been telling ussuch a tale about Mademoiselle George and Buonaparte!"Prince Andrew screwed up his eyes and turned away. Pierre, who from themoment Prince Andrew entered the room had watched him with glad,affectionate eyes, now came up and took his arm. Before he looked roundPrince Andrew frowned again, expressing his annoyance with whoever wastouching his arm, but when he saw Pierre's beaming face he gave him anunexpectedly kind and pleasant smile."There now!... So you, too, are in the great world?" said he to Pierre."I knew you would be here," replied Pierre. "I will come to supper withyou. May I?" he added in a low voice so as not to disturb the vicomtewho was continuing his story."No, impossible!" said Prince Andrew, laughing and pressing Pierre'shand to show that there was no need to ask the question. He wished tosay something more, but at that moment Prince Vasili and his daughtergot up to go and the two young men rose to let them pass."You must excuse me, dear Vicomte," said Prince Vasili to the Frenchman,holding him down by the sleeve in a friendly way to prevent his rising."This unfortunate fete at the ambassador's deprives me of a pleasure,and obliges me to interrupt you. I am very sorry to leave yourenchanting party," said he, turning to Anna Pavlovna.His daughter, Princess Helene, passed between the chairs, lightlyholding up the folds of her dress, and the smile shone still moreradiantly on her beautiful face. Pierre gazed at her with rapturous,almost frightened, eyes as she passed him."Very lovely," said Prince Andrew."Very," said Pierre.In passing Prince Vasili seized Pierre's hand and said to Anna Pavlovna:"Educate this bear for me! He has been staying with me a whole month andthis is the first time I have seen him in society. Nothing is sonecessary for a young man as the society of clever women."Anna Pavlovna smiled and promised to take Pierre in hand. She knew hisfather to be a connection of Prince Vasili's. The elderly lady who hadbeen sitting with the old aunt rose hurriedly and overtook Prince Vasiliin the anteroom. All the affectation of interest she had assumed hadleft her kindly and tear-worn face and it now expressed only anxiety andfear."How about my son Boris, Prince?" said she, hurrying after him into theanteroom. "I can't remain any longer in Petersburg. Tell me what news Imay take back to my poor boy."Although Prince Vasili listened reluctantly and not very politely to theelderly lady, even betraying some impatience, she gave him aningratiating and appealing smile, and took his hand that he might not goaway."What would it cost you to say a word to the Emperor, and then he wouldbe transferred to the Guards at once?" said she."Believe me, Princess, I am ready to do all I can," answered PrinceVasili, "but it is difficult for me to ask the Emperor. I should adviseyou to appeal to Rumyantsev through Prince Golitsyn. That would be thebest way."The elderly lady was a Princess Drubetskaya, belonging to one of thebest families in Russia, but she was poor, and having long been out ofsociety had lost her former influential connections. She had now come toPetersburg to procure an appointment in the Guards for her only son. Itwas, in fact, solely to meet Prince Vasili that she had obtained aninvitation to Anna Pavlovna's reception and had sat listening to thevicomte's story. Prince Vasili's words frightened her, an embitteredlook clouded her once handsome face, but only for a moment; then shesmiled again and clutched Prince Vasili's arm more tightly."Listen to me, Prince," said she. "I have never yet asked you foranything and I never will again, nor have I ever reminded you of myfather's friendship for you; but now I entreat you for God's sake to dothis for my son--and I shall always regard you as a benefactor," sheadded hurriedly. "No, don't be angry, but promise! I have asked Golitsynand he has refused. Be the kindhearted man you always were," she said,trying to smile though tears were in her eyes."Papa, we shall be late," said Princess Helene, turning her beautifulhead and looking over her classically molded shoulder as she stoodwaiting by the door.Influence in society, however, is a capital which has to be economizedif it is to last. Prince Vasili knew this, and having once realized thatif he asked on behalf of all who begged of him, he would soon be unableto ask for himself, he became chary of using his influence. But inPrincess Drubetskaya's case he felt, after her second appeal, somethinglike qualms of conscience. She had reminded him of what was quite true;he had been indebted to her father for the first steps in his career.Moreover, he could see by her manners that she was one of those women--mostly mothers--who, having once made up their minds, will not restuntil they have gained their end, and are prepared if necessary to go oninsisting day after day and hour after hour, and even to make scenes.This last consideration moved him."My dear Anna Mikhaylovna," said he with his usual familiarity andweariness of tone, "it is almost impossible for me to do what you ask;but to prove my devotion to you and how I respect your father's memory,I will do the impossible--your son shall be transferred to the Guards.Here is my hand on it. Are you satisfied?""My dear benefactor! This is what I expected from you--I knew yourkindness!" He turned to go."Wait--just a word! When he has been transferred to the Guards..." shefaltered. "You are on good terms with Michael Ilarionovich Kutuzov...recommend Boris to him as adjutant! Then I shall be at rest, andthen..."Prince Vasili smiled."No, I won't promise that. You don't know how Kutuzov is pestered sincehis appointment as Commander in Chief. He told me himself that all theMoscow ladies have conspired to give him all their sons as adjutants.""No, but do promise! I won't let you go! My dear benefactor...""Papa," said his beautiful daughter in the same tone as before, "weshall be late.""Well, au revoir! Good-bye! You hear her?""Then tomorrow you will speak to the Emperor?""Certainly; but about Kutuzov, I don't promise.""Do promise, do promise, Vasili!" cried Anna Mikhaylovna as he went,with the smile of a coquettish girl, which at one time probably camenaturally to her, but was now very ill-suited to her careworn face.Apparently she had forgotten her age and by force of habit employed allthe old feminine arts. But as soon as the prince had gone her faceresumed its former cold, artificial expression. She returned to thegroup where the vicomte was still talking, and again pretended tolisten, while waiting till it would be time to leave. Her task wasaccomplished.CHAPTER V"And what do you think of this latest comedy, the coronation at Milan?"asked Anna Pavlovna, "and of the comedy of the people of Genoa and Luccalaying their petitions before Monsieur Buonaparte, and MonsieurBuonaparte sitting on a throne and granting the petitions of thenations? Adorable! It is enough to make one's head whirl! It is as ifthe whole world had gone crazy."Prince Andrew looked Anna Pavlovna straight in the face with a sarcasticsmile."'Dieu me la donne, gare a qui la touche!' * They say he was very finewhen he said that," he remarked, repeating the words in Italian: "'Diomi l'ha dato. Guai a chi la tocchi!'"* God has given it to me, let him who touches it beware!"I hope this will prove the last drop that will make the glass runover," Anna Pavlovna continued. "The sovereigns will not be able toendure this man who is a menace to everything.""The sovereigns? I do not speak of Russia," said the vicomte, polite buthopeless: "The sovereigns, madame... What have they done for Louis XVII,for the Queen, or for Madame Elizabeth? Nothing!" and he became moreanimated. "And believe me, they are reaping the reward of their betrayalof the Bourbon cause. The sovereigns! Why, they are sending ambassadorsto compliment the usurper."And sighing disdainfully, he again changed his position.Prince Hippolyte, who had been gazing at the vicomte for some timethrough his lorgnette, suddenly turned completely round toward thelittle princess, and having asked for a needle began tracing the Condecoat of arms on the table. He explained this to her with as much gravityas if she had asked him to do it."Baton de gueules, engrele de gueules d'azur--maison Conde," said he.The princess listened, smiling."If Buonaparte remains on the throne of France a year longer," thevicomte continued, with the air of a man who, in a matter with which heis better acquainted than anyone else, does not listen to others butfollows the current of his own thoughts, "things will have gone too far.By intrigues, violence, exile, and executions, French society--I meangood French society--will have been forever destroyed, and then..."He shrugged his shoulders and spread out his hands. Pierre wished tomake a remark, for the conversation interested him, but Anna Pavlovna,who had him under observation, interrupted:"The Emperor Alexander," said she, with the melancholy which alwaysaccompanied any reference of hers to the Imperial family, "has declaredthat he will leave it to the French people themselves to choose theirown form of government; and I believe that once free from the usurper,the whole nation will certainly throw itself into the arms of itsrightful king," she concluded, trying to be amiable to the royalistemigrant."That is doubtful," said Prince Andrew. "Monsieur le Vicomte quiterightly supposes that matters have already gone too far. I think it willbe difficult to return to the old regime.""From what I have heard," said Pierre, blushing and breaking into theconversation, "almost all the aristocracy has already gone over toBonaparte's side.""It is the Buonapartists who say that," replied the vicomte withoutlooking at Pierre. "At the present time it is difficult to know the realstate of French public opinion.""Bonaparte has said so," remarked Prince Andrew with a sarcastic smile.It was evident that he did not like the vicomte and was aiming hisremarks at him, though without looking at him."'I showed them the path to glory, but they did not follow it,'" PrinceAndrew continued after a short silence, again quoting Napoleon's words."'I opened my antechambers and they crowded in.' I do not know how farhe was justified in saying so.""Not in the least," replied the vicomte. "After the murder of the duceven the most partial ceased to regard him as a hero. If to somepeople," he went on, turning to Anna Pavlovna, "he ever was a hero,after the murder of the duc there was one martyr more in heaven and onehero less on earth."Before Anna Pavlovna and the others had time to smile their appreciationof the vicomte's epigram, Pierre again broke into the conversation, andthough Anna Pavlovna felt sure he would say something inappropriate, shewas unable to stop him."The execution of the Duc d'Enghien," declared Monsieur Pierre, "was apolitical necessity, and it seems to me that Napoleon showed greatnessof soul by not fearing to take on himself the whole responsibility ofthat deed.""Dieu! Mon Dieu!" muttered Anna Pavlovna in a terrified whisper."What, Monsieur Pierre... Do you consider that assassination showsgreatness of soul?" said the little princess, smiling and drawing herwork nearer to her."Oh! Oh!" exclaimed several voices."Capital!" said Prince Hippolyte in English, and began slapping his kneewith the palm of his hand.The vicomte merely shrugged his shoulders. Pierre looked solemnly at hisaudience over his spectacles and continued."I say so," he continued desperately, "because the Bourbons fled fromthe Revolution leaving the people to anarchy, and Napoleon aloneunderstood the Revolution and quelled it, and so for the general good,he could not stop short for the sake of one man's life.""Won't you come over to the other table?" suggested Anna Pavlovna.But Pierre continued his speech without heeding her."No," cried he, becoming more and more eager, "Napoleon is great becausehe rose superior to the Revolution, suppressed its abuses, preserved allthat was good in it--equality of citizenship and freedom of speech andof the press--and only for that reason did he obtain power.""Yes, if having obtained power, without availing himself of it to commitmurder he had restored it to the rightful king, I should have called hima great man," remarked the vicomte."He could not do that. The people only gave him power that he might ridthem of the Bourbons and because they saw that he was a great man. TheRevolution was a grand thing!" continued Monsieur Pierre, betraying bythis desperate and provocative proposition his extreme youth and hiswish to express all that was in his mind."What? Revolution and regicide a grand thing?... Well, after that... Butwon't you come to this other table?" repeated Anna Pavlovna."Rousseau's Contrat Social," said the vicomte with a tolerant smile."I am not speaking of regicide, I am speaking about ideas.""Yes: ideas of robbery, murder, and regicide," again interjected anironical voice."Those were extremes, no doubt, but they are not what is most important.What is important are the rights of man, emancipation from prejudices,and equality of citizenship, and all these ideas Napoleon has retainedin full force.""Liberty and equality," said the vicomte contemptuously, as if at lastdeciding seriously to prove to this youth how foolish his words were,"high-sounding words which have long been discredited. Who does not loveliberty and equality? Even our Saviour preached liberty and equality.Have people since the Revolution become happier? On the contrary. Wewanted liberty, but Buonaparte has destroyed it."Prince Andrew kept looking with an amused smile from Pierre to thevicomte and from the vicomte to their hostess. In the first moment ofPierre's outburst Anna Pavlovna, despite her social experience, washorror-struck. But when she saw that Pierre's sacrilegious words had notexasperated the vicomte, and had convinced herself that it wasimpossible to stop him, she rallied her forces and joined the vicomte ina vigorous attack on the orator."But, my dear Monsieur Pierre," said she, "how do you explain the factof a great man executing a duc--or even an ordinary man who--is innocentand untried?""I should like," said the vicomte, "to ask how monsieur explains the18th Brumaire; was not that an imposture? It was a swindle, and not atall like the conduct of a great man!""And the prisoners he killed in Africa? That was horrible!" said thelittle princess, shrugging her shoulders."He's a low fellow, say what you will," remarked Prince Hippolyte.Pierre, not knowing whom to answer, looked at them all and smiled. Hissmile was unlike the half-smile of other people. When he smiled, hisgrave, even rather gloomy, look was instantaneously replaced by another--a childlike, kindly, even rather silly look, which seemed to askforgiveness.The vicomte who was meeting him for the first time saw clearly that thisyoung Jacobin was not so terrible as his words suggested. All weresilent."How do you expect him to answer you all at once?" said Prince Andrew."Besides, in the actions of a statesman one has to distinguish betweenhis acts as a private person, as a general, and as an emperor. So itseems to me.""Yes, yes, of course!" Pierre chimed in, pleased at the arrival of thisreinforcement."One must admit," continued Prince Andrew, "that Napoleon as a man wasgreat on the bridge of Arcola, and in the hospital at Jaffa where hegave his hand to the plague-stricken; but... but there are other actswhich it is difficult to justify."Prince Andrew, who had evidently wished to tone down the awkwardness ofPierre's remarks, rose and made a sign to his wife that it was time togo.Suddenly Prince Hippolyte started up making signs to everyone to attend,and asking them all to be seated began:"I was told a charming Moscow story today and must treat you to it.Excuse me, Vicomte--I must tell it in Russian or the point will belost...." And Prince Hippolyte began to tell his story in such Russianas a Frenchman would speak after spending about a year in Russia.Everyone waited, so emphatically and eagerly did he demand theirattention to his story."There is in Moscow a lady, une dame, and she is very stingy. She musthave two footmen behind her carriage, and very big ones. That was hertaste. And she had a lady's maid, also big. She said..."Here Prince Hippolyte paused, evidently collecting his ideas withdifficulty."She said... Oh yes! She said, 'Girl,' to the maid, 'put on a livery,get up behind the carriage, and come with me while I make some calls.'"Here Prince Hippolyte spluttered and burst out laughing long before hisaudience, which produced an effect unfavorable to the narrator. Severalpersons, among them the elderly lady and Anna Pavlovna, did howeversmile."She went. Suddenly there was a great wind. The girl lost her hat andher long hair came down...." Here he could contain himself no longer andwent on, between gasps of laughter: "And the whole world knew...."And so the anecdote ended. Though it was unintelligible why he had toldit, or why it had to be told in Russian, still Anna Pavlovna and theothers appreciated Prince Hippolyte's social tact in so agreeably endingPierre's unpleasant and unamiable outburst. After the anecdote theconversation broke up into insignificant small talk about the last andnext balls, about theatricals, and who would meet whom, and when andwhere.CHAPTER VIHaving thanked Anna Pavlovna for her charming soiree, the guests beganto take their leave.Pierre was ungainly. Stout, about the average height, broad, with hugered hands; he did not know, as the saying is, how to enter a drawingroom and still less how to leave one; that is, how to say somethingparticularly agreeable before going away. Besides this he was absent-minded. When he rose to go, he took up instead of his own, the general'sthree-cornered hat, and held it, pulling at the plume, till the generalasked him to restore it. All his absent-mindedness and inability toenter a room and converse in it was, however, redeemed by his kindly,simple, and modest expression. Anna Pavlovna turned toward him and, witha Christian mildness that expressed forgiveness of his indiscretion,nodded and said: "I hope to see you again, but I also hope you willchange your opinions, my dear Monsieur Pierre."When she said this, he did not reply and only bowed, but again everybodysaw his smile, which said nothing, unless perhaps, "Opinions areopinions, but you see what a capital, good-natured fellow I am." Andeveryone, including Anna Pavlovna, felt this.Prince Andrew had gone out into the hall, and, turning his shoulders tothe footman who was helping him on with his cloak, listenedindifferently to his wife's chatter with Prince Hippolyte who had alsocome into the hall. Prince Hippolyte stood close to the pretty, pregnantprincess, and stared fixedly at her through his eyeglass."Go in, Annette, or you will catch cold," said the little princess,taking leave of Anna Pavlovna. "It is settled," she added in a lowvoice.Anna Pavlovna had already managed to speak to Lise about the match shecontemplated between Anatole and the little princess' sister-in-law."I rely on you, my dear," said Anna Pavlovna, also in a low tone. "Writeto her and let me know how her father looks at the matter. Au revoir!"--and she left the hall.Prince Hippolyte approached the little princess and, bending his faceclose to her, began to whisper something.Two footmen, the princess' and his own, stood holding a shawl and acloak, waiting for the conversation to finish. They listened to theFrench sentences which to them were meaningless, with an air ofunderstanding but not wishing to appear to do so. The princess as usualspoke smilingly and listened with a laugh."I am very glad I did not go to the ambassador's," said Prince Hippolyte"-so dull-. It has been a delightful evening, has it not? Delightful!""They say the ball will be very good," replied the princess, drawing upher downy little lip. "All the pretty women in society will be there.""Not all, for you will not be there; not all," said Prince Hippolytesmiling joyfully; and snatching the shawl from the footman, whom he evenpushed aside, he began wrapping it round the princess. Either fromawkwardness or intentionally (no one could have said which) after theshawl had been adjusted he kept his arm around her for a long time, asthough embracing her.Still smiling, she gracefully moved away, turning and glancing at herhusband. Prince Andrew's eyes were closed, so weary and sleepy did heseem."Are you ready?" he asked his wife, looking past her.Prince Hippolyte hurriedly put on his cloak, which in the latest fashionreached to his very heels, and, stumbling in it, ran out into the porchfollowing the princess, whom a footman was helping into the carriage."Princesse, au revoir," cried he, stumbling with his tongue as well aswith his feet.The princess, picking up her dress, was taking her seat in the darkcarriage, her husband was adjusting his saber; Prince Hippolyte, underpretense of helping, was in everyone's way."Allow me, sir," said Prince Andrew in Russian in a cold, disagreeabletone to Prince Hippolyte who was blocking his path."I am expecting you, Pierre," said the same voice, but gently andaffectionately.The postilion started, the carriage wheels rattled. Prince Hippolytelaughed spasmodically as he stood in the porch waiting for the vicomtewhom he had promised to take home."Well, mon cher," said the vicomte, having seated himself besideHippolyte in the carriage, "your little princess is very nice, very niceindeed, quite French," and he kissed the tips of his fingers. Hippolyteburst out laughing."Do you know, you are a terrible chap for all your innocent airs,"continued the vicomte. "I pity the poor husband, that little officer whogives himself the airs of a monarch."Hippolyte spluttered again, and amid his laughter said, "And you weresaying that the Russian ladies are not equal to the French? One has toknow how to deal with them."Pierre reaching the house first went into Prince Andrew's study like onequite at home, and from habit immediately lay down on the sofa, tookfrom the shelf the first book that came to his hand (it was Caesar'sCommentaries), and resting on his elbow, began reading it in the middle."What have you done to Mlle Scherer? She will be quite ill now," saidPrince Andrew, as he entered the study, rubbing his small white hands.Pierre turned his whole body, making the sofa creak. He lifted his eagerface to Prince Andrew, smiled, and waved his hand."That abbe is very interesting but he does not see the thing in theright light.... In my opinion perpetual peace is possible but--I do notknow how to express it... not by a balance of political power...."It was evident that Prince Andrew was not interested in such abstractconversation."One can't everywhere say all one thinks, mon cher. Well, have you atlast decided on anything? Are you going to be a guardsman or adiplomatist?" asked Prince Andrew after a momentary silence.Pierre sat up on the sofa, with his legs tucked under him."Really, I don't yet know. I don't like either the one or the other.""But you must decide on something! Your father expects it."Pierre at the age of ten had been sent abroad with an abbe as tutor, andhad remained away till he was twenty. When he returned to Moscow hisfather dismissed the abbe and said to the young man, "Now go toPetersburg, look round, and choose your profession. I will agree toanything. Here is a letter to Prince Vasili, and here is money. Write tome all about it, and I will help you in everything." Pierre had alreadybeen choosing a career for three months, and had not decided onanything. It was about this choice that Prince Andrew was speaking.Pierre rubbed his forehead."But he must be a Freemason," said he, referring to the abbe whom he hadmet that evening."That is all nonsense." Prince Andrew again interrupted him, "let ustalk business. Have you been to the Horse Guards?""No, I have not; but this is what I have been thinking and wanted totell you. There is a war now against Napoleon. If it were a war forfreedom I could understand it and should be the first to enter the army;but to help England and Austria against the greatest man in the world isnot right."Prince Andrew only shrugged his shoulders at Pierre's childish words. Heput on the air of one who finds it impossible to reply to such nonsense,but it would in fact have been difficult to give any other answer thanthe one Prince Andrew gave to this naive question."If no one fought except on his own conviction, there would be no wars,"he said."And that would be splendid," said Pierre.Prince Andrew smiled ironically."Very likely it would be splendid, but it will never come about...""Well, why are you going to the war?" asked Pierre."What for? I don't know. I must. Besides that I am going..." He paused."I am going because the life I am leading here does not suit me!"CHAPTER VIIThe rustle of a woman's dress was heard in the next room. Prince Andrewshook himself as if waking up, and his face assumed the look it had hadin Anna Pavlovna's drawing room. Pierre removed his feet from the sofa.The princess came in. She had changed her gown for a house dress asfresh and elegant as the other. Prince Andrew rose and politely placed achair for her."How is it," she began, as usual in French, settling down briskly andfussily in the easy chair, "how is it Annette never got married? Howstupid you men all are not to have married her! Excuse me for saying so,but you have no sense about women. What an argumentative fellow you are,Monsieur Pierre!""And I am still arguing with your husband. I can't understand why hewants to go to the war," replied Pierre, addressing the princess withnone of the embarrassment so commonly shown by young men in theirintercourse with young women.The princess started. Evidently Pierre's words touched her to the quick."Ah, that is just what I tell him!" said she. "I don't understand it; Idon't in the least understand why men can't live without wars. How is itthat we women don't want anything of the kind, don't need it? Now youshall judge between us. I always tell him: Here he is Uncle's aide-de-camp, a most brilliant position. He is so well known, so muchappreciated by everyone. The other day at the Apraksins' I heard a ladyasking, 'Is that the famous Prince Andrew?' I did indeed." She laughed."He is so well received everywhere. He might easily become aide-de-campto the Emperor. You know the Emperor spoke to him most graciously.Annette and I were speaking of how to arrange it. What do you think?"Pierre looked at his friend and, noticing that he did not like theconversation, gave no reply."When are you starting?" he asked."Oh, don't speak of his going, don't! I won't hear it spoken of," saidthe princess in the same petulantly playful tone in which she had spokento Hippolyte in the drawing room and which was so plainly ill-suited tothe family circle of which Pierre was almost a member. "Today when Iremembered that all these delightful associations must be broken off...and then you know, Andre..." (she looked significantly at her husband)"I'm afraid, I'm afraid!" she whispered, and a shudder ran down herback.Her husband looked at her as if surprised to notice that someone besidesPierre and himself was in the room, and addressed her in a tone offrigid politeness."What is it you are afraid of, Lise? I don't understand," said he."There, what egotists men all are: all, all egotists! Just for a whim ofhis own, goodness only knows why, he leaves me and locks me up alone inthe country.""With my father and sister, remember," said Prince Andrew gently."Alone all the same, without my friends.... And he expects me not to beafraid."Her tone was now querulous and her lip drawn up, giving her not ajoyful, but an animal, squirrel-like expression. She paused as if shefelt it indecorous to speak of her pregnancy before Pierre, though thegist of the matter lay in that."I still can't understand what you are afraid of," said Prince Andrewslowly, not taking his eyes off his wife.The princess blushed, and raised her arms with a gesture of despair."No, Andrew, I must say you have changed. Oh, how you have...""Your doctor tells you to go to bed earlier," said Prince Andrew. "Youhad better go."The princess said nothing, but suddenly her short downy lip quivered.Prince Andrew rose, shrugged his shoulders, and walked about the room.Pierre looked over his spectacles with naive surprise, now at him andnow at her, moved as if about to rise too, but changed his mind."Why should I mind Monsieur Pierre being here?" exclaimed the littleprincess suddenly, her pretty face all at once distorted by a tearfulgrimace. "I have long wanted to ask you, Andrew, why you have changed soto me? What have I done to you? You are going to the war and have nopity for me. Why is it?""Lise!" was all Prince Andrew said. But that one word expressed anentreaty, a threat, and above all conviction that she would herselfregret her words. But she went on hurriedly:"You treat me like an invalid or a child. I see it all! Did you behavelike that six months ago?""Lise, I beg you to desist," said Prince Andrew still more emphatically.Pierre, who had been growing more and more agitated as he listened toall this, rose and approached the princess. He seemed unable to bear thesight of tears and was ready to cry himself."Calm yourself, Princess! It seems so to you because... I assure you Imyself have experienced... and so... because... No, excuse me! Anoutsider is out of place here... No, don't distress yourself... Good-bye!"Prince Andrew caught him by the hand."No, wait, Pierre! The princess is too kind to wish to deprive me of thepleasure of spending the evening with you.""No, he thinks only of himself," muttered the princess withoutrestraining her angry tears."Lise!" said Prince Andrew dryly, raising his voice to the pitch whichindicates that patience is exhausted.Suddenly the angry, squirrel-like expression of the princess' prettyface changed into a winning and piteous look of fear. Her beautiful eyesglanced askance at her husband's face, and her own assumed the timid,deprecating expression of a dog when it rapidly but feebly wags itsdrooping tail."Mon Dieu, mon Dieu!" she muttered, and lifting her dress with one handshe went up to her husband and kissed him on the forehead."Good night, Lise," said he, rising and courteously kissing her hand ashe would have done to a stranger.CHAPTER VIIIThe friends were silent. Neither cared to begin talking. Pierrecontinually glanced at Prince Andrew; Prince Andrew rubbed his foreheadwith his small hand."Let us go and have supper," he said with a sigh, going to the door.They entered the elegant, newly decorated, and luxurious dining room.Everything from the table napkins to the silver, china, and glass borethat imprint of newness found in the households of the newly married.Halfway through supper Prince Andrew leaned his elbows on the table and,with a look of nervous agitation such as Pierre had never before seen onhis face, began to talk--as one who has long had something on his mindand suddenly determines to speak out."Never, never marry, my dear fellow! That's my advice: never marry tillyou can say to yourself that you have done all you are capable of, anduntil you have ceased to love the woman of your choice and have seen herplainly as she is, or else you will make a cruel and irrevocablemistake. Marry when you are old and good for nothing--or all that isgood and noble in you will be lost. It will all be wasted on trifles.Yes! Yes! Yes! Don't look at me with such surprise. If you marryexpecting anything from yourself in the future, you will feel at everystep that for you all is ended, all is closed except the drawing room,where you will be ranged side by side with a court lackey and anidiot!... But what's the good?..." and he waved his arm.Pierre took off his spectacles, which made his face seem different andthe good-natured expression still more apparent, and gazed at his friendin amazement."My wife," continued Prince Andrew, "is an excellent woman, one of thoserare women with whom a man's honor is safe; but, O God, what would I notgive now to be unmarried! You are the first and only one to whom Imention this, because I like you."As he said this Prince Andrew was less than ever like that Bolkonski whohad lolled in Anna Pavlovna's easy chairs and with half-closed eyes haduttered French phrases between his teeth. Every muscle of his thin facewas now quivering with nervous excitement; his eyes, in which the fireof life had seemed extinguished, now flashed with brilliant light. Itwas evident that the more lifeless he seemed at ordinary times, the moreimpassioned he became in these moments of almost morbid irritation."You don't understand why I say this," he continued, "but it is thewhole story of life. You talk of Bonaparte and his career," said he(though Pierre had not mentioned Bonaparte), "but Bonaparte when heworked went step by step toward his goal. He was free, he had nothingbut his aim to consider, and he reached it. But tie yourself up with awoman and, like a chained convict, you lose all freedom! And all youhave of hope and strength merely weighs you down and torments you withregret. Drawing rooms, gossip, balls, vanity, and triviality--these arethe enchanted circle I cannot escape from. I am now going to the war,the greatest war there ever was, and I know nothing and am fit fornothing. I am very amiable and have a caustic wit," continued PrinceAndrew, "and at Anna Pavlovna's they listen to me. And that stupid setwithout whom my wife cannot exist, and those women... If you only knewwhat those society women are, and women in general! My father is right.Selfish, vain, stupid, trivial in everything--that's what women are whenyou see them in their true colors! When you meet them in society itseems as if there were something in them, but there's nothing, nothing,nothing! No, don't marry, my dear fellow; don't marry!" concluded PrinceAndrew."It seems funny to me," said Pierre, "that you, you should consideryourself incapable and your life a spoiled life. You have everythingbefore you, everything. And you..."He did not finish his sentence, but his tone showed how highly hethought of his friend and how much he expected of him in the future."How can he talk like that?" thought Pierre. He considered his friend amodel of perfection because Prince Andrew possessed in the highestdegree just the very qualities Pierre lacked, and which might be bestdescribed as strength of will. Pierre was always astonished at PrinceAndrew's calm manner of treating everybody, his extraordinary memory,his extensive reading (he had read everything, knew everything, and hadan opinion about everything), but above all at his capacity for work andstudy. And if Pierre was often struck by Andrew's lack of capacity forphilosophical meditation (to which he himself was particularlyaddicted), he regarded even this not as a defect but as a sign ofstrength.Even in the best, most friendly and simplest relations of life, praiseand commendation are essential, just as grease is necessary to wheelsthat they may run smoothly."My part is played out," said Prince Andrew. "What's the use of talkingabout me? Let us talk about you," he added after a silence, smiling athis reassuring thoughts.That smile was immediately reflected on Pierre's face."But what is there to say about me?" said Pierre, his face relaxing intoa careless, merry smile. "What am I? An illegitimate son!" He suddenlyblushed crimson, and it was plain that he had made a great effort to saythis. "Without a name and without means... And it really..." But he didnot say what "it really" was. "For the present I am free and am allright. Only I haven't the least idea what I am to do; I wanted toconsult you seriously."Prince Andrew looked kindly at him, yet his glance--friendly andaffectionate as it was--expressed a sense of his own superiority."I am fond of you, especially as you are the one live man among ourwhole set. Yes, you're all right! Choose what you will; it's all thesame. You'll be all right anywhere. But look here: give up visitingthose Kuragins and leading that sort of life. It suits you so badly--allthis debauchery, dissipation, and the rest of it!""What would you have, my dear fellow?" answered Pierre, shrugging hisshoulders. "Women, my dear fellow; women!""I don't understand it," replied Prince Andrew. "Women who are comme ilfaut, that's a different matter; but the Kuragins' set of women, 'womenand wine' I don't understand!"Pierre was staying at Prince Vasili Kuragin's and sharing the dissipatedlife of his son Anatole, the son whom they were planning to reform bymarrying him to Prince Andrew's sister."Do you know?" said Pierre, as if suddenly struck by a happy thought,"seriously, I have long been thinking of it.... Leading such a life Ican't decide or think properly about anything. One's head aches, and onespends all one's money. He asked me for tonight, but I won't go.""You give me your word of honor not to go?""On my honor!"CHAPTER IXIt was past one o'clock when Pierre left his friend. It was a cloudless,northern, summer night. Pierre took an open cab intending to drivestraight home. But the nearer he drew to the house the more he felt theimpossibility of going to sleep on such a night. It was light enough tosee a long way in the deserted street and it seemed more like morning orevening than night. On the way Pierre remembered that Anatole Kuraginwas expecting the usual set for cards that evening, after which therewas generally a drinking bout, finishing with visits of a kind Pierrewas very fond of."I should like to go to Kuragin's," thought he.But he immediately recalled his promise to Prince Andrew not to gothere. Then, as happens to people of weak character, he desired sopassionately once more to enjoy that dissipation he was so accustomed tothat he decided to go. The thought immediately occurred to him that hispromise to Prince Andrew was of no account, because before he gave it hehad already promised Prince Anatole to come to his gathering; "besides,"thought he, "all such 'words of honor' are conventional things with nodefinite meaning, especially if one considers that by tomorrow one maybe dead, or something so extraordinary may happen to one that honor anddishonor will be all the same!" Pierre often indulged in reflections ofthis sort, nullifying all his decisions and intentions. He went toKuragin's.Reaching the large house near the Horse Guards' barracks, in whichAnatole lived, Pierre entered the lighted porch, ascended the stairs,and went in at the open door. There was no one in the anteroom; emptybottles, cloaks, and overshoes were lying about; there was a smell ofalcohol, and sounds of voices and shouting in the distance.Cards and supper were over, but the visitors had not yet dispersed.Pierre threw off his cloak and entered the first room, in which were theremains of supper. A footman, thinking no one saw him, was drinking onthe sly what was left in the glasses. From the third room came sounds oflaughter, the shouting of familiar voices, the growling of a bear, andgeneral commotion. Some eight or nine young men were crowding anxiouslyround an open window. Three others were romping with a young bear, onepulling him by the chain and trying to set him at the others."I bet a hundred on Stevens!" shouted one."Mind, no holding on!" cried another."I bet on Dolokhov!" cried a third. "Kuragin, you part our hands.""There, leave Bruin alone; here's a bet on.""At one draught, or he loses!" shouted a fourth."Jacob, bring a bottle!" shouted the host, a tall, handsome fellow whostood in the midst of the group, without a coat, and with his fine linenshirt unfastened in front. "Wait a bit, you fellows.... Here is Petya!Good man!" cried he, addressing Pierre.Another voice, from a man of medium height with clear blue eyes,particularly striking among all these drunken voices by its sober ring,cried from the window: "Come here; part the bets!" This was Dolokhov, anofficer of the Semenov regiment, a notorious gambler and duelist, whowas living with Anatole. Pierre smiled, looking about him merrily."I don't understand. What's it all about?""Wait a bit, he is not drunk yet! A bottle here," said Anatole, taking aglass from the table he went up to Pierre."First of all you must drink!"Pierre drank one glass after another, looking from under his brows atthe tipsy guests who were again crowding round the window, and listeningto their chatter. Anatole kept on refilling Pierre's glass whileexplaining that Dolokhov was betting with Stevens, an English navalofficer, that he would drink a bottle of rum sitting on the outer ledgeof the third floor window with his legs hanging out."Go on, you must drink it all," said Anatole, giving Pierre the lastglass, "or I won't let you go!""No, I won't," said Pierre, pushing Anatole aside, and he went up to thewindow.Dolokhov was holding the Englishman's hand and clearly and distinctlyrepeating the terms of the bet, addressing himself particularly toAnatole and Pierre.Dolokhov was of medium height, with curly hair and light-blue eyes. Hewas about twenty-five. Like all infantry officers he wore no mustache,so that his mouth, the most striking feature of his face, was clearlyseen. The lines of that mouth were remarkably finely curved. The middleof the upper lip formed a sharp wedge and closed firmly on the firmlower one, and something like two distinct smiles played continuallyround the two corners of the mouth; this, together with the resolute,insolent intelligence of his eyes, produced an effect which made itimpossible not to notice his face. Dolokhov was a man of small means andno connections. Yet, though Anatole spent tens of thousands of rubles,Dolokhov lived with him and had placed himself on such a footing thatall who knew them, including Anatole himself, respected him more thanthey did Anatole. Dolokhov could play all games and nearly always won.However much he drank, he never lost his clearheadedness. Both Kuraginand Dolokhov were at that time notorious among the rakes and scapegracesof Petersburg.The bottle of rum was brought. The window frame which prevented anyonefrom sitting on the outer sill was being forced out by two footmen, whowere evidently flurried and intimidated by the directions and shouts ofthe gentlemen around.Anatole with his swaggering air strode up to the window. He wanted tosmash something. Pushing away the footmen he tugged at the frame, butcould not move it. He smashed a pane."You have a try, Hercules," said he, turning to Pierre.Pierre seized the crossbeam, tugged, and wrenched the oak frame out witha crash."Take it right out, or they'll think I'm holding on," said Dolokhov."Is the Englishman bragging?... Eh? Is it all right?" said Anatole."First-rate," said Pierre, looking at Dolokhov, who with a bottle of rumin his hand was approaching the window, from which the light of the sky,the dawn merging with the afterglow of sunset, was visible.Dolokhov, the bottle of rum still in his hand, jumped onto the windowsill. "Listen!" cried he, standing there and addressing those in theroom. All were silent."I bet fifty imperials"--he spoke French that the Englishman mightunderstand him, but he did not speak it very well--"I bet fiftyimperials... or do you wish to make it a hundred?" added he, addressingthe Englishman."No, fifty," replied the latter."All right. Fifty imperials... that I will drink a whole bottle of rumwithout taking it from my mouth, sitting outside the window on thisspot" (he stooped and pointed to the sloping ledge outside the window)"and without holding on to anything. Is that right?""Quite right," said the Englishman.Anatole turned to the Englishman and taking him by one of the buttons ofhis coat and looking down at him--the Englishman was short--beganrepeating the terms of the wager to him in English."Wait!" cried Dolokhov, hammering with the bottle on the window sill toattract attention. "Wait a bit, Kuragin. Listen! If anyone else does thesame, I will pay him a hundred imperials. Do you understand?"The Englishman nodded, but gave no indication whether he intended toaccept this challenge or not. Anatole did not release him, and though hekept nodding to show that he understood, Anatole went on translatingDolokhov's words into English. A thin young lad, an hussar of the LifeGuards, who had been losing that evening, climbed on the window sill,leaned over, and looked down."Oh! Oh! Oh!" he muttered, looking down from the window at the stones ofthe pavement."Shut up!" cried Dolokhov, pushing him away from the window. The ladjumped awkwardly back into the room, tripping over his spurs.Placing the bottle on the window sill where he could reach it easily,Dolokhov climbed carefully and slowly through the window and lowered hislegs. Pressing against both sides of the window, he adjusted himself onhis seat, lowered his hands, moved a little to the right and then to theleft, and took up the bottle. Anatole brought two candles and placedthem on the window sill, though it was already quite light. Dolokhov'sback in his white shirt, and his curly head, were lit up from bothsides. Everyone crowded to the window, the Englishman in front. Pierrestood smiling but silent. One man, older than the others present,suddenly pushed forward with a scared and angry look and wanted to seizehold of Dolokhov's shirt."I say, this is folly! He'll be killed," said this more sensible man.Anatole stopped him."Don't touch him! You'll startle him and then he'll be killed. Eh?...What then?... Eh?"Dolokhov turned round and, again holding on with both hands, arrangedhimself on his seat."If anyone comes meddling again," said he, emitting the words separatelythrough his thin compressed lips, "I will throw him down there. Nowthen!"Saying this he again turned round, dropped his hands, took the bottleand lifted it to his lips, threw back his head, and raised his free handto balance himself. One of the footmen who had stooped to pick up somebroken glass remained in that position without taking his eyes from thewindow and from Dolokhov's back. Anatole stood erect with staring eyes.The Englishman looked on sideways, pursing up his lips. The man who hadwished to stop the affair ran to a corner of the room and threw himselfon a sofa with his face to the wall. Pierre hid his face, from which afaint smile forgot to fade though his features now expressed horror andfear. All were still. Pierre took his hands from his eyes. Dolokhovstill sat in the same position, only his head was thrown further backtill his curly hair touched his shirt collar, and the hand holding thebottle was lifted higher and higher and trembled with the effort. Thebottle was emptying perceptibly and rising still higher and his headtilting yet further back. "Why is it so long?" thought Pierre. It seemedto him that more than half an hour had elapsed. Suddenly Dolokhov made abackward movement with his spine, and his arm trembled nervously; thiswas sufficient to cause his whole body to slip as he sat on the slopingledge. As he began slipping down, his head and arm wavered still morewith the strain. One hand moved as if to clutch the window sill, butrefrained from touching it. Pierre again covered his eyes and thought hewould never open them again. Suddenly he was aware of a stir all around.He looked up: Dolokhov was standing on the window sill, with a pale butradiant face."It's empty."He threw the bottle to the Englishman, who caught it neatly. Dolokhovjumped down. He smelt strongly of rum."Well done!... Fine fellow!... There's a bet for you!... Devil takeyou!" came from different sides.The Englishman took out his purse and began counting out the money.Dolokhov stood frowning and did not speak. Pierre jumped upon the windowsill."Gentlemen, who wishes to bet with me? I'll do the same thing!" hesuddenly cried. "Even without a bet, there! Tell them to bring me abottle. I'll do it.... Bring a bottle!""Let him do it, let him do it," said Dolokhov, smiling."What next? Have you gone mad?... No one would let you!... Why, you gogiddy even on a staircase," exclaimed several voices."I'll drink it! Let's have a bottle of rum!" shouted Pierre, banging thetable with a determined and drunken gesture and preparing to climb outof the window.They seized him by his arms; but he was so strong that everyone whotouched him was sent flying."No, you'll never manage him that way," said Anatole. "Wait a bit andI'll get round him.... Listen! I'll take your bet tomorrow, but now weare all going to ----'s.""Come on then," cried Pierre. "Come on!... And we'll take Bruin withus."And he caught the bear, took it in his arms, lifted it from the ground,and began dancing round the room with it.CHAPTER XPrince Vasili kept the promise he had given to Princess Drubetskaya whohad spoken to him on behalf of her only son Boris on the evening of AnnaPavlovna's soiree. The matter was mentioned to the Emperor, an exceptionmade, and Boris transferred into the regiment of Semenov Guards with therank of cornet. He received, however, no appointment to Kutuzov's staffdespite all Anna Mikhaylovna's endeavors and entreaties. Soon after AnnaPavlovna's reception Anna Mikhaylovna returned to Moscow and wentstraight to her rich relations, the Rostovs, with whom she stayed whenin the town and where her darling Bory, who had only just entered aregiment of the line and was being at once transferred to the Guards asa cornet, had been educated from childhood and lived for years at atime. The Guards had already left Petersburg on the tenth of August, andher son, who had remained in Moscow for his equipment, was to join themon the march to Radzivilov.It was St. Natalia's day and the name day of two of the Rostovs--themother and the youngest daughter--both named Nataly. Ever since themorning, carriages with six horses had been coming and goingcontinually, bringing visitors to the Countess Rostova's big house onthe Povarskaya, so well known to all Moscow. The countess herself andher handsome eldest daughter were in the drawing-room with the visitorswho came to congratulate, and who constantly succeeded one another inrelays.The countess was a woman of about forty-five, with a thin Oriental typeof face, evidently worn out with childbearing--she had had twelve. Alanguor of motion and speech, resulting from weakness, gave her adistinguished air which inspired respect. Princess Anna MikhaylovnaDrubetskaya, who as a member of the household was also seated in thedrawing room, helped to receive and entertain the visitors. The youngpeople were in one of the inner rooms, not considering it necessary totake part in receiving the visitors. The count met the guests and sawthem off, inviting them all to dinner."I am very, very grateful to you, mon cher," or "ma chere"--he calledeveryone without exception and without the slightest variation in histone, "my dear," whether they were above or below him in rank--"I thankyou for myself and for our two dear ones whose name day we are keeping.But mind you come to dinner or I shall be offended, ma chere! On behalfof the whole family I beg you to come, mon cher!" These words herepeated to everyone without exception or variation, and with the sameexpression on his full, cheerful, clean-shaven face, the same firmpressure of the hand and the same quick, repeated bows. As soon as hehad seen a visitor off he returned to one of those who were still in thedrawing room, drew a chair toward him or her, and jauntily spreading outhis legs and putting his hands on his knees with the air of a man whoenjoys life and knows how to live, he swayed to and fro with dignity,offered surmises about the weather, or touched on questions of health,sometimes in Russian and sometimes in very bad but self-confidentFrench; then again, like a man weary but unflinching in the fulfillmentof duty, he rose to see some visitors off and, stroking his scanty grayhairs over his bald patch, also asked them to dinner. Sometimes on hisway back from the anteroom he would pass through the conservatory andpantry into the large marble dining hall, where tables were being setout for eighty people; and looking at the footmen, who were bringing insilver and china, moving tables, and unfolding damask table linen, hewould call Dmitri Vasilevich, a man of good family and the manager ofall his affairs, and while looking with pleasure at the enormous tablewould say: "Well, Dmitri, you'll see that things are all as they shouldbe? That's right! The great thing is the serving, that's it." And with acomplacent sigh he would return to the drawing room."Marya Lvovna Karagina and her daughter!" announced the countess'gigantic footman in his bass voice, entering the drawing room. Thecountess reflected a moment and took a pinch from a gold snuffbox withher husband's portrait on it."I'm quite worn out by these callers. However, I'll see her and no more.She is so affected. Ask her in," she said to the footman in a sad voice,as if saying: "Very well, finish me off."A tall, stout, and proud-looking woman, with a round-faced smilingdaughter, entered the drawing room, their dresses rustling."Dear Countess, what an age... She has been laid up, poor child... atthe Razumovski's ball... and Countess Apraksina... I was sodelighted..." came the sounds of animated feminine voices, interruptingone another and mingling with the rustling of dresses and the scrapingof chairs. Then one of those conversations began which last out until,at the first pause, the guests rise with a rustle of dresses and say, "Iam so delighted... Mamma's health... and Countess Apraksina..." andthen, again rustling, pass into the anteroom, put on cloaks or mantles,and drive away. The conversation was on the chief topic of the day: theillness of the wealthy and celebrated beau of Catherine's day, CountBezukhov, and about his illegitimate son Pierre, the one who had behavedso improperly at Anna Pavlovna's reception."I am so sorry for the poor count," said the visitor. "He is in such badhealth, and now this vexation about his son is enough to kill him!""What is that?" asked the countess as if she did not know what thevisitor alluded to, though she had already heard about the cause ofCount Bezukhov's distress some fifteen times."That's what comes of a modern education," exclaimed the visitor. "Itseems that while he was abroad this young man was allowed to do as heliked, now in Petersburg I hear he has been doing such terrible thingsthat he has been expelled by the police.""You don't say so!" replied the countess."He chose his friends badly," interposed Anna Mikhaylovna. "PrinceVasili's son, he, and a certain Dolokhov have, it is said, been up toheaven only knows what! And they have had to suffer for it. Dolokhov hasbeen degraded to the ranks and Bezukhov's son sent back to Moscow.Anatole Kuragin's father managed somehow to get his son's affair hushedup, but even he was ordered out of Petersburg.""But what have they been up to?" asked the countess."They are regular brigands, especially Dolokhov," replied the visitor."He is a son of Marya Ivanovna Dolokhova, such a worthy woman, butthere, just fancy! Those three got hold of a bear somewhere, put it in acarriage, and set off with it to visit some actresses! The police triedto interfere, and what did the young men do? They tied a policeman andthe bear back to back and put the bear into the Moyka Canal. And therewas the bear swimming about with the policeman on his back!""What a nice figure the policeman must have cut, my dear!" shouted thecount, dying with laughter."Oh, how dreadful! How can you laugh at it, Count?"Yet the ladies themselves could not help laughing."It was all they could do to rescue the poor man," continued thevisitor. "And to think it is Cyril Vladimirovich Bezukhov's son whoamuses himself in this sensible manner! And he was said to be so welleducated and clever. This is all that his foreign education has done forhim! I hope that here in Moscow no one will receive him, in spite of hismoney. They wanted to introduce him to me, but I quite declined: I havemy daughters to consider.""Why do you say this young man is so rich?" asked the countess, turningaway from the girls, who at once assumed an air of inattention. "Hischildren are all illegitimate. I think Pierre also is illegitimate."The visitor made a gesture with her hand."I should think he has a score of them."Princess Anna Mikhaylovna intervened in the conversation, evidentlywishing to show her connections and knowledge of what went on insociety."The fact of the matter is," said she significantly, and also in a halfwhisper, "everyone knows Count Cyril's reputation.... He has lost countof his children, but this Pierre was his favorite.""How handsome the old man still was only a year ago!" remarked thecountess. "I have never seen a handsomer man.""He is very much altered now," said Anna Mikhaylovna. "Well, as I wassaying, Prince Vasili is the next heir through his wife, but the countis very fond of Pierre, looked after his education, and wrote to theEmperor about him; so that in the case of his death--and he is so illthat he may die at any moment, and Dr. Lorrain has come from Petersburg--no one knows who will inherit his immense fortune, Pierre or PrinceVasili. Forty thousand serfs and millions of rubles! I know it all verywell for Prince Vasili told me himself. Besides, Cyril Vladimirovich ismy mother's second cousin. He's also my Bory's godfather," she added, asif she attached no importance at all to the fact."Prince Vasili arrived in Moscow yesterday. I hear he has come on someinspection business," remarked the visitor."Yes, but between ourselves," said the princess, "that is a pretext. Thefact is he has come to see Count Cyril Vladimirovich, hearing how ill heis.""But do you know, my dear, that was a capital joke," said the count; andseeing that the elder visitor was not listening, he turned to the youngladies. "I can just imagine what a funny figure that policeman cut!"And as he waved his arms to impersonate the policeman, his portly formagain shook with a deep ringing laugh, the laugh of one who always eatswell and, in particular, drinks well. "So do come and dine with us!" hesaid.CHAPTER XISilence ensued. The countess looked at her callers, smiling affably, butnot concealing the fact that she would not be distressed if they nowrose and took their leave. The visitor's daughter was already smoothingdown her dress with an inquiring look at her mother, when suddenly fromthe next room were heard the footsteps of boys and girls running to thedoor and the noise of a chair falling over, and a girl of thirteen,hiding something in the folds of her short muslin frock, darted in andstopped short in the middle of the room. It was evident that she had notintended her flight to bring her so far. Behind her in the doorwayappeared a student with a crimson coat collar, an officer of the Guards,a girl of fifteen, and a plump rosy-faced boy in a short jacket.The count jumped up and, swaying from side to side, spread his arms wideand threw them round the little girl who had run in."Ah, here she is!" he exclaimed laughing. "My pet, whose name day it is.My dear pet!""Ma chere, there is a time for everything," said the countess withfeigned severity. "You spoil her, Ilya," she added, turning to herhusband."How do you do, my dear? I wish you many happy returns of your nameday," said the visitor. "What a charming child," she added, addressingthe mother.This black-eyed, wide-mouthed girl, not pretty but full of life--withchildish bare shoulders which after her run heaved and shook her bodice,with black curls tossed backward, thin bare arms, little legs in lace-frilled drawers, and feet in low slippers--was just at that charming agewhen a girl is no longer a child, though the child is not yet a youngwoman. Escaping from her father she ran to hide her flushed face in thelace of her mother's mantilla--not paying the least attention to hersevere remark--and began to laugh. She laughed, and in fragmentarysentences tried to explain about a doll which she produced from thefolds of her frock."Do you see?... My doll... Mimi... You see..." was all Natasha managedto utter (to her everything seemed funny). She leaned against her motherand burst into such a loud, ringing fit of laughter that even the primvisitor could not help joining in."Now then, go away and take your monstrosity with you," said the mother,pushing away her daughter with pretended sternness, and turning to thevisitor she added: "She is my youngest girl."Natasha, raising her face for a moment from her mother's mantilla,glanced up at her through tears of laughter, and again hid her face.The visitor, compelled to look on at this family scene, thought itnecessary to take some part in it."Tell me, my dear," said she to Natasha, "is Mimi a relation of yours? Adaughter, I suppose?"Natasha did not like the visitor's tone of condescension to childishthings. She did not reply, but looked at her seriously.Meanwhile the younger generation: Boris, the officer, Anna Mikhaylovna'sson; Nicholas, the undergraduate, the count's eldest son; Sonya, thecount's fifteen-year-old niece, and little Petya, his youngest boy, hadall settled down in the drawing room and were obviously trying torestrain within the bounds of decorum the excitement and mirth thatshone in all their faces. Evidently in the back rooms, from which theyhad dashed out so impetuously, the conversation had been more amusingthan the drawing-room talk of society scandals, the weather, andCountess Apraksina. Now and then they glanced at one another, hardlyable to suppress their laughter.The two young men, the student and the officer, friends from childhood,were of the same age and both handsome fellows, though not alike. Boriswas tall and fair, and his calm and handsome face had regular, delicatefeatures. Nicholas was short with curly hair and an open expression.Dark hairs were already showing on his upper lip, and his whole faceexpressed impetuosity and enthusiasm. Nicholas blushed when he enteredthe drawing room. He evidently tried to find something to say, butfailed. Boris on the contrary at once found his footing, and relatedquietly and humorously how he had known that doll Mimi when she wasstill quite a young lady, before her nose was broken; how she had agedduring the five years he had known her, and how her head had crackedright across the skull. Having said this he glanced at Natasha. Sheturned away from him and glanced at her younger brother, who wasscrewing up his eyes and shaking with suppressed laughter, and unable tocontrol herself any longer, she jumped up and rushed from the room asfast as her nimble little feet would carry her. Boris did not laugh."You were meaning to go out, weren't you, Mamma? Do you want thecarriage?" he asked his mother with a smile."Yes, yes, go and tell them to get it ready," she answered, returninghis smile.Boris quietly left the room and went in search of Natasha. The plump boyran after them angrily, as if vexed that their program had beendisturbed.CHAPTER XIIThe only young people remaining in the drawing room, not counting theyoung lady visitor and the countess' eldest daughter (who was four yearsolder than her sister and behaved already like a grown-up person), wereNicholas and Sonya, the niece. Sonya was a slender little brunette witha tender look in her eyes which were veiled by long lashes, thick blackplaits coiling twice round her head, and a tawny tint in her complexionand especially in the color of her slender but graceful and musculararms and neck. By the grace of her movements, by the softness andflexibility of her small limbs, and by a certain coyness and reserve ofmanner, she reminded one of a pretty, half-grown kitten which promisesto become a beautiful little cat. She evidently considered it proper toshow an interest in the general conversation by smiling, but in spite ofherself her eyes under their thick long lashes watched her cousin whowas going to join the army, with such passionate girlish adoration thather smile could not for a single instant impose upon anyone, and it wasclear that the kitten had settled down only to spring up with moreenergy and again play with her cousin as soon as they too could, likeNatasha and Boris, escape from the drawing room."Ah yes, my dear," said the count, addressing the visitor and pointingto Nicholas, "his friend Boris has become an officer, and so forfriendship's sake he is leaving the university and me, his old father,and entering the military service, my dear. And there was a place andeverything waiting for him in the Archives Department! Isn't thatfriendship?" remarked the count in an inquiring tone."But they say that war has been declared," replied the visitor."They've been saying so a long while," said the count, "and they'll sayso again and again, and that will be the end of it. My dear, there'sfriendship for you," he repeated. "He's joining the hussars."The visitor, not knowing what to say, shook her head."It's not at all from friendship," declared Nicholas, flaring up andturning away as if from a shameful aspersion. "It is not from friendshipat all; I simply feel that the army is my vocation."He glanced at his cousin and the young lady visitor; and they were bothregarding him with a smile of approbation."Schubert, the colonel of the Pavlograd Hussars, is dining with ustoday. He has been here on leave and is taking Nicholas back with him.It can't be helped!" said the count, shrugging his shoulders andspeaking playfully of a matter that evidently distressed him."I have already told you, Papa," said his son, "that if you don't wishto let me go, I'll stay. But I know I am no use anywhere except in thearmy; I am not a diplomat or a government clerk.--I don't know how tohide what I feel." As he spoke he kept glancing with the flirtatiousnessof a handsome youth at Sonya and the young lady visitor.The little kitten, feasting her eyes on him, seemed ready at any momentto start her gambols again and display her kittenish nature."All right, all right!" said the old count. "He always flares up! ThisBuonaparte has turned all their heads; they all think of how he rosefrom an ensign and became Emperor. Well, well, God grant it," he added,not noticing his visitor's sarcastic smile.The elders began talking about Bonaparte. Julie Karagina turned to youngRostov."What a pity you weren't at the Arkharovs' on Thursday. It was so dullwithout you," said she, giving him a tender smile.The young man, flattered, sat down nearer to her with a coquettishsmile, and engaged the smiling Julie in a confidential conversationwithout at all noticing that his involuntary smile had stabbed the heartof Sonya, who blushed and smiled unnaturally. In the midst of his talkhe glanced round at her. She gave him a passionately angry glance, andhardly able to restrain her tears and maintain the artificial smile onher lips, she got up and left the room. All Nicholas' animationvanished. He waited for the first pause in the conversation, and thenwith a distressed face left the room to find Sonya."How plainly all these young people wear their hearts on their sleeves!"said Anna Mikhaylovna, pointing to Nicholas as he went out. "Cousinage--dangereux voisinage;" * she added.* Cousinhood is a dangerous neighborhood."Yes," said the countess when the brightness these young people hadbrought into the room had vanished; and as if answering a question noone had put but which was always in her mind, "and how much suffering,how much anxiety one has had to go through that we might rejoice in themnow! And yet really the anxiety is greater now than the joy. One isalways, always anxious! Especially just at this age, so dangerous bothfor girls and boys.""It all depends on the bringing up," remarked the visitor."Yes, you're quite right," continued the countess. "Till now I havealways, thank God, been my children's friend and had their fullconfidence," said she, repeating the mistake of so many parents whoimagine that their children have no secrets from them. "I know I shallalways be my daughters' first confidante, and that if Nicholas, with hisimpulsive nature, does get into mischief (a boy can't help it), he willall the same never be like those Petersburg young men.""Yes, they are splendid, splendid youngsters," chimed in the count, whoalways solved questions that seemed to him perplexing by deciding thateverything was splendid. "Just fancy: wants to be an hussar. What's oneto do, my dear?""What a charming creature your younger girl is," said the visitor; "alittle volcano!""Yes, a regular volcano," said the count. "Takes after me! And what avoice she has; though she's my daughter, I tell the truth when I sayshe'll be a singer, a second Salomoni! We have engaged an Italian togive her lessons.""Isn't she too young? I have heard that it harms the voice to train itat that age.""Oh no, not at all too young!" replied the count. "Why, our mothers usedto be married at twelve or thirteen.""And she's in love with Boris already. Just fancy!" said the countesswith a gentle smile, looking at Boris and went on, evidently concernedwith a thought that always occupied her: "Now you see if I were to besevere with her and to forbid it... goodness knows what they might be upto on the sly" (she meant that they would be kissing), "but as it is, Iknow every word she utters. She will come running to me of her ownaccord in the evening and tell me everything. Perhaps I spoil her, butreally that seems the best plan. With her elder sister I was stricter.""Yes, I was brought up quite differently," remarked the handsome elderdaughter, Countess Vera, with a smile.But the smile did not enhance Vera's beauty as smiles generally do; onthe contrary it gave her an unnatural, and therefore unpleasant,expression. Vera was good-looking, not at all stupid, quick at learning,was well-brought up, and had a pleasant voice; what she said was trueand appropriate, yet, strange to say, everyone--the visitors andcountess alike--turned to look at her as if wondering why she had saidit, and they all felt awkward."People are always too clever with their eldest children and try to makesomething exceptional of them," said the visitor."What's the good of denying it, my dear? Our dear countess was tooclever with Vera," said the count. "Well, what of that? She's turned outsplendidly all the same," he added, winking at Vera.The guests got up and took their leave, promising to return to dinner."What manners! I thought they would never go," said the countess, whenshe had seen her guests out.CHAPTER XIIIWhen Natasha ran out of the drawing room she only went as far as theconservatory. There she paused and stood listening to the conversationin the drawing room, waiting for Boris to come out. She was alreadygrowing impatient, and stamped her foot, ready to cry at his not comingat once, when she heard the young man's discreet steps approachingneither quickly nor slowly. At this Natasha dashed swiftly among theflower tubs and hid there.Boris paused in the middle of the room, looked round, brushed a littledust from the sleeve of his uniform, and going up to a mirror examinedhis handsome face. Natasha, very still, peered out from her ambush,waiting to see what he would do. He stood a little while before theglass, smiled, and walked toward the other door. Natasha was about tocall him but changed her mind. "Let him look for me," thought she.Hardly had Boris gone than Sonya, flushed, in tears, and mutteringangrily, came in at the other door. Natasha checked her first impulse torun out to her, and remained in her hiding place, watching--as under aninvisible cap--to see what went on in the world. She was experiencing anew and peculiar pleasure. Sonya, muttering to herself, kept lookinground toward the drawing-room door. It opened and Nicholas came in."Sonya, what is the matter with you? How can you?" said he, running upto her."It's nothing, nothing; leave me alone!" sobbed Sonya."Ah, I know what it is.""Well, if you do, so much the better, and you can go back to her!""So-o-onya! Look here! How can you torture me and yourself like that,for a mere fancy?" said Nicholas taking her hand.Sonya did not pull it away, and left off crying. Natasha, not stirringand scarcely breathing, watched from her ambush with sparkling eyes."What will happen now?" thought she."Sonya! What is anyone in the world to me? You alone are everything!"said Nicholas. "And I will prove it to you.""I don't like you to talk like that.""Well, then, I won't; only forgive me, Sonya!" He drew her to him andkissed her."Oh, how nice," thought Natasha; and when Sonya and Nicholas had goneout of the conservatory she followed and called Boris to her."Boris, come here," said she with a sly and significant look. "I havesomething to tell you. Here, here!" and she led him into theconservatory to the place among the tubs where she had been hiding.Boris followed her, smiling."What is the something?" asked he.She grew confused, glanced round, and, seeing the doll she had throwndown on one of the tubs, picked it up."Kiss the doll," said she.Boris looked attentively and kindly at her eager face, but did notreply."Don't you want to? Well, then, come here," said she, and went furtherin among the plants and threw down the doll. "Closer, closer!" shewhispered.She caught the young officer by his cuffs, and a look of solemnity andfear appeared on her flushed face."And me? Would you like to kiss me?" she whispered almost inaudibly,glancing up at him from under her brows, smiling, and almost crying fromexcitement.Boris blushed."How funny you are!" he said, bending down to her and blushing stillmore, but he waited and did nothing.Suddenly she jumped up onto a tub to be higher than he, embraced him sothat both her slender bare arms clasped him above his neck, and, tossingback her hair, kissed him full on the lips.Then she slipped down among the flowerpots on the other side of the tubsand stood, hanging her head."Natasha," he said, "you know that I love you, but...""You are in love with me?" Natasha broke in."Yes, I am, but please don't let us do like that.... In another fouryears... then I will ask for your hand."Natasha considered."Thirteen, fourteen, fifteen, sixteen," she counted on her slenderlittle fingers. "All right! Then it's settled?"A smile of joy and satisfaction lit up her eager face."Settled!" replied Boris."Forever?" said the little girl. "Till death itself?"She took his arm and with a happy face went with him into the adjoiningsitting room.CHAPTER XIVAfter receiving her visitors, the countess was so tired that she gaveorders to admit no more, but the porter was told to be sure to invite todinner all who came "to congratulate." The countess wished to have atte--tte talk with the friend of her childhood, Princess AnnaMikhaylovna, whom she had not seen properly since she returned fromPetersburg. Anna Mikhaylovna, with her tear-worn but pleasant face, drewher chair nearer to that of the countess."With you I will be quite frank," said Anna Mikhaylovna. "There are notmany left of us old friends! That's why I so value your friendship."Anna Mikhaylovna looked at Vera and paused. The countess pressed herfriend's hand."Vera," she said to her eldest daughter who was evidently not afavorite, "how is it you have so little tact? Don't you see you are notwanted here? Go to the other girls, or..."The handsome Vera smiled contemptuously but did not seem at all hurt."If you had told me sooner, Mamma, I would have gone," she replied asshe rose to go to her own room.But as she passed the sitting room she noticed two couples sitting, onepair at each window. She stopped and smiled scornfully. Sonya wassitting close to Nicholas who was copying out some verses for her, thefirst he had ever written. Boris and Natasha were at the other windowand ceased talking when Vera entered. Sonya and Natasha looked at Verawith guilty, happy faces.It was pleasant and touching to see these little girls in love; butapparently the sight of them roused no pleasant feeling in Vera."How often have I asked you not to take my things?" she said. "You havea room of your own," and she took the inkstand from Nicholas."In a minute, in a minute," he said, dipping his pen."You always manage to do things at the wrong time," continued Vera. "Youcame rushing into the drawing room so that everyone felt ashamed ofyou."Though what she said was quite just, perhaps for that very reason no onereplied, and the four simply looked at one another. She lingered in theroom with the inkstand in her hand."And at your age what secrets can there be between Natasha and Boris, orbetween you two? It's all nonsense!""Now, Vera, what does it matter to you?" said Natasha in defense,speaking very gently.She seemed that day to be more than ever kind and affectionate toeveryone."Very silly," said Vera. "I am ashamed of you. Secrets indeed!""All have secrets of their own," answered Natasha, getting warmer. "Wedon't interfere with you and Berg.""I should think not," said Vera, "because there can never be anythingwrong in my behavior. But I'll just tell Mamma how you are behaving withBoris.""Natalya Ilynichna behaves very well to me," remarked Boris. "I havenothing to complain of.""Don't, Boris! You are such a diplomat that it is really tiresome," saidNatasha in a mortified voice that trembled slightly. (She used the word"diplomat," which was just then much in vogue among the children, in thespecial sense they attached to it.) "Why does she bother me?" And sheadded, turning to Vera, "You'll never understand it, because you'venever loved anyone. You have no heart! You are a Madame de Genlis andnothing more" (this nickname, bestowed on Vera by Nicholas, wasconsidered very stinging), "and your greatest pleasure is to beunpleasant to people! Go and flirt with Berg as much as you please," shefinished quickly."I shall at any rate not run after a young man before visitors...""Well, now you've done what you wanted," put in Nicholas--"saidunpleasant things to everyone and upset them. Let's go to the nursery."All four, like a flock of scared birds, got up and left the room."The unpleasant things were said to me," remarked Vera, "I said none toanyone.""Madame de Genlis! Madame de Genlis!" shouted laughing voices throughthe door.The handsome Vera, who produced such an irritating and unpleasant effecton everyone, smiled and, evidently unmoved by what had been said to her,went to the looking glass and arranged her hair and scarf. Looking ather own handsome face she seemed to become still colder and calmer.In the drawing room the conversation was still going on."Ah, my dear," said the countess, "my life is not all roses either.Don't I know that at the rate we are living our means won't last long?It's all the Club and his easygoing nature. Even in the country do weget any rest? Theatricals, hunting, and heaven knows what besides! Butdon't let's talk about me; tell me how you managed everything. I oftenwonder at you, Annette--how at your age you can rush off alone in acarriage to Moscow, to Petersburg, to those ministers and great people,and know how to deal with them all! It's quite astonishing. How did youget things settled? I couldn't possibly do it.""Ah, my love," answered Anna Mikhaylovna, "God grant you never know whatit is to be left a widow without means and with a son you love todistraction! One learns many things then," she added with a certainpride. "That lawsuit taught me much. When I want to see one of those bigpeople I write a note: 'Princess So-and-So desires an interview with Soand-So,' and then I take a cab and go myself two, three, or four times--till I get what I want. I don't mind what they think of me.""Well, and to whom did you apply about Bory?" asked the countess. "Yousee yours is already an officer in the Guards, while my Nicholas isgoing as a cadet. There's no one to interest himself for him. To whomdid you apply?""To Prince Vasili. He was so kind. He at once agreed to everything, andput the matter before the Emperor," said Princess Anna Mikhaylovnaenthusiastically, quite forgetting all the humiliation she had enduredto gain her end."Has Prince Vasili aged much?" asked the countess. "I have not seen himsince we acted together at the Rumyantsovs' theatricals. I expect he hasforgotten me. He paid me attentions in those days," said the countess,with a smile."He is just the same as ever," replied Anna Mikhaylovna, "overflowingwith amiability. His position has not turned his head at all. He said tome, 'I am sorry I can do so little for you, dear Princess. I am at yourcommand.' Yes, he is a fine fellow and a very kind relation. But,Nataly, you know my love for my son: I would do anything for hishappiness! And my affairs are in such a bad way that my position is nowa terrible one," continued Anna Mikhaylovna, sadly, dropping her voice."My wretched lawsuit takes all I have and makes no progress. Would youbelieve it, I have literally not a penny and don't know how to equipBoris." She took out her handkerchief and began to cry. "I need fivehundred rubles, and have only one twenty-five-ruble note. I am in such astate.... My only hope now is in Count Cyril Vladimirovich Bezukhov. Ifhe will not assist his godson--you know he is Bory's godfather--andallow him something for his maintenance, all my trouble will have beenthrown away.... I shall not be able to equip him."The countess' eyes filled with tears and she pondered in silence."I often think, though, perhaps it's a sin," said the princess, "thathere lives Count Cyril Vladimirovich Bezukhov so rich, all alone... thattremendous fortune... and what is his life worth? It's a burden to him,and Bory's life is only just beginning....""Surely he will leave something to Boris," said the countess."Heaven only knows, my dear! These rich grandees are so selfish. Still,I will take Boris and go to see him at once, and I shall speak to himstraight out. Let people think what they will of me, it's really all thesame to me when my son's fate is at stake." The princess rose. "It's nowtwo o'clock and you dine at four. There will just be time."And like a practical Petersburg lady who knows how to make the most oftime, Anna Mikhaylovna sent someone to call her son, and went into theanteroom with him."Good-bye, my dear," said she to the countess who saw her to the door,and added in a whisper so that her son should not hear, "Wish me goodluck.""Are you going to Count Cyril Vladimirovich, my dear?" said the countcoming out from the dining hall into the anteroom, and he added: "If heis better, ask Pierre to dine with us. He has been to the house, youknow, and danced with the children. Be sure to invite him, my dear. Wewill see how Taras distinguishes himself today. He says Count Orlovnever gave such a dinner as ours will be!"CHAPTER XV"My dear Boris," said Princess Anna Mikhaylovna to her son as CountessRostova's carriage in which they were seated drove over the strawcovered street and turned into the wide courtyard of Count CyrilVladimirovich Bezukhov's house. "My dear Boris," said the mother,drawing her hand from beneath her old mantle and laying it timidly andtenderly on her son's arm, "be affectionate and attentive to him. CountCyril Vladimirovich is your godfather after all, your future depends onhim. Remember that, my dear, and be nice to him, as you so well know howto be.""If only I knew that anything besides humiliation would come of it..."answered her son coldly. "But I have promised and will do it for yoursake."Although the hall porter saw someone's carriage standing at theentrance, after scrutinizing the mother and son (who without asking tobe announced had passed straight through the glass porch between therows of statues in niches) and looking significantly at the lady's oldcloak, he asked whether they wanted the count or the princesses, and,hearing that they wished to see the count, said his excellency was worsetoday, and that his excellency was not receiving anyone."We may as well go back," said the son in French."My dear!" exclaimed his mother imploringly, again laying her hand onhis arm as if that touch might soothe or rouse him.Boris said no more, but looked inquiringly at his mother without takingoff his cloak."My friend," said Anna Mikhaylovna in gentle tones, addressing the hallporter, "I know Count Cyril Vladimirovich is very ill... that's why Ihave come... I am a relation. I shall not disturb him, my friend... Ionly need see Prince Vasili Sergeevich: he is staying here, is he not?Please announce me."The hall porter sullenly pulled a bell that rang upstairs, and turnedaway."Princess Drubetskaya to see Prince Vasili Sergeevich," he called to afootman dressed in knee breeches, shoes, and a swallow-tail coat, whoran downstairs and looked over from the halfway landing.The mother smoothed the folds of her dyed silk dress before a largeVenetian mirror in the wall, and in her trodden-down shoes brisklyascended the carpeted stairs."My dear," she said to her son, once more stimulating him by a touch,"you promised me!"The son, lowering his eyes, followed her quietly.They entered the large hall, from which one of the doors led to theapartments assigned to Prince Vasili.Just as the mother and son, having reached the middle of the hall, wereabout to ask their way of an elderly footman who had sprung up as theyentered, the bronze handle of one of the doors turned and Prince Vasilicame out--wearing a velvet coat with a single star on his breast, as washis custom when at home--taking leave of a good-looking, dark-hairedman. This was the celebrated Petersburg doctor, Lorrain."Then it is certain?" said the prince."Prince, humanum est errare, * but..." replied the doctor, swallowinghis r's, and pronouncing the Latin words with a French accent.* To err is human."Very well, very well..."Seeing Anna Mikhaylovna and her son, Prince Vasili dismissed the doctorwith a bow and approached them silently and with a look of inquiry. Theson noticed that an expression of profound sorrow suddenly clouded hismother's face, and he smiled slightly."Ah, Prince! In what sad circumstances we meet again! And how is ourdear invalid?" said she, as though unaware of the cold offensive lookfixed on her.Prince Vasili stared at her and at Boris questioningly and perplexed.Boris bowed politely. Prince Vasili without acknowledging the bow turnedto Anna Mikhaylovna, answering her query by a movement of the head andlips indicating very little hope for the patient."Is it possible?" exclaimed Anna Mikhaylovna. "Oh, how awful! It isterrible to think.... This is my son," she added, indicating Boris. "Hewanted to thank you himself."Boris bowed again politely."Believe me, Prince, a mother's heart will never forget what you havedone for us.""I am glad I was able to do you a service, my dear Anna Mikhaylovna,"said Prince Vasili, arranging his lace frill, and in tone and manner,here in Moscow to Anna Mikhaylovna whom he had placed under anobligation, assuming an air of much greater importance than he had donein Petersburg at Anna Scherer's reception."Try to serve well and show yourself worthy," added he, addressing Boriswith severity. "I am glad.... Are you here on leave?" he went on in hisusual tone of indifference."I am awaiting orders to join my new regiment, your excellency," repliedBoris, betraying neither annoyance at the prince's brusque manner nor adesire to enter into conversation, but speaking so quietly andrespectfully that the prince gave him a searching glance."Are you living with your mother?""I am living at Countess Rostova's," replied Boris, again adding, "yourexcellency.""That is, with Ilya Rostov who married Nataly Shinshina," said AnnaMikhaylovna."I know, I know," answered Prince Vasili in his monotonous voice. "Inever could understand how Nataly made up her mind to marry thatunlicked bear! A perfectly absurd and stupid fellow, and a gambler too,I am told.""But a very kind man, Prince," said Anna Mikhaylovna with a patheticsmile, as though she too knew that Count Rostov deserved this censure,but asked him not to be too hard on the poor old man. "What do thedoctors say?" asked the princess after a pause, her worn face againexpressing deep sorrow."They give little hope," replied the prince."And I should so like to thank Uncle once for all his kindness to me andBoris. He is his godson," she added, her tone suggesting that this factought to give Prince Vasili much satisfaction.Prince Vasili became thoughtful and frowned. Anna Mikhaylovna saw thathe was afraid of finding in her a rival for Count Bezukhov's fortune,and hastened to reassure him."If it were not for my sincere affection and devotion to Uncle," saidshe, uttering the word with peculiar assurance and unconcern, "I knowhis character: noble, upright... but you see he has no one with himexcept the young princesses.... They are still young...." She bent herhead and continued in a whisper: "Has he performed his final duty,Prince? How priceless are those last moments! It can make things noworse, and it is absolutely necessary to prepare him if he is so ill. Wewomen, Prince," and she smiled tenderly, "always know how to say thesethings. I absolutely must see him, however painful it may be for me. Iam used to suffering."Evidently the prince understood her, and also understood, as he had doneat Anna Pavlovna's, that it would be difficult to get rid of AnnaMikhaylovna."Would not such a meeting be too trying for him, dear Anna Mikhaylovna?"said he. "Let us wait until evening. The doctors are expecting acrisis.""But one cannot delay, Prince, at such a moment! Consider that thewelfare of his soul is at stake. Ah, it is awful: the duties of aChristian..."A door of one of the inner rooms opened and one of the princesses, thecount's niece, entered with a cold, stern face. The length of her bodywas strikingly out of proportion to her short legs. Prince Vasili turnedto her."Well, how is he?""Still the same; but what can you expect, this noise..." said theprincess, looking at Anna Mikhaylovna as at a stranger."Ah, my dear, I hardly knew you," said Anna Mikhaylovna with a happysmile, ambling lightly up to the count's niece. "I have come, and am atyour service to help you nurse my uncle. I imagine what you have gonethrough," and she sympathetically turned up her eyes.The princess gave no reply and did not even smile, but left the room asAnna Mikhaylovna took off her gloves and, occupying the position she hadconquered, settled down in an armchair, inviting Prince Vasili to take aseat beside her."Boris," she said to her son with a smile, "I shall go in to see thecount, my uncle; but you, my dear, had better go to Pierre meanwhile anddon't forget to give him the Rostovs' invitation. They ask him todinner. I suppose he won't go?" she continued, turning to the prince."On the contrary," replied the prince, who had plainly become depressed,"I shall be only too glad if you relieve me of that young man.... Herehe is, and the count has not once asked for him."He shrugged his shoulders. A footman conducted Boris down one flight ofstairs and up another, to Pierre's rooms.CHAPTER XVIPierre, after all, had not managed to choose a career for himself inPetersburg, and had been expelled from there for riotous conduct andsent to Moscow. The story told about him at Count Rostov's was true.Pierre had taken part in tying a policeman to a bear. He had now beenfor some days in Moscow and was staying as usual at his father's house.Though he expected that the story of his escapade would be already knownin Moscow and that the ladies about his father--who were never favorablydisposed toward him--would have used it to turn the count against him,he nevertheless on the day of his arrival went to his father's part ofthe house. Entering the drawing room, where the princesses spent most oftheir time, he greeted the ladies, two of whom were sitting atembroidery frames while a third read aloud. It was the eldest who wasreading--the one who had met Anna Mikhaylovna. The two younger ones wereembroidering: both were rosy and pretty and they differed only in thatone had a little mole on her lip which made her much prettier. Pierrewas received as if he were a corpse or a leper. The eldest princesspaused in her reading and silently stared at him with frightened eyes;the second assumed precisely the same expression; while the youngest,the one with the mole, who was of a cheerful and lively disposition,bent over her frame to hide a smile probably evoked by the amusing sceneshe foresaw. She drew her wool down through the canvas and, scarcelyable to refrain from laughing, stooped as if trying to make out thepattern."How do you do, cousin?" said Pierre. "You don't recognize me?""I recognize you only too well, too well.""How is the count? Can I see him?" asked Pierre, awkwardly as usual, butunabashed."The count is suffering physically and mentally, and apparently you havedone your best to increase his mental sufferings.""Can I see the count?" Pierre again asked."Hm.... If you wish to kill him, to kill him outright, you can seehim... Olga, go and see whether Uncle's beef tea is ready--it is almosttime," she added, giving Pierre to understand that they were busy, andbusy making his father comfortable, while evidently he, Pierre, was onlybusy causing him annoyance.Olga went out. Pierre stood looking at the sisters; then he bowed andsaid: "Then I will go to my rooms. You will let me know when I can seehim."And he left the room, followed by the low but ringing laughter of thesister with the mole.Next day Prince Vasili had arrived and settled in the count's house. Hesent for Pierre and said to him: "My dear fellow, if you are going tobehave here as you did in Petersburg, you will end very badly; that isall I have to say to you. The count is very, very ill, and you must notsee him at all."Since then Pierre had not been disturbed and had spent the whole time inhis rooms upstairs.When Boris appeared at his door Pierre was pacing up and down his room,stopping occasionally at a corner to make menacing gestures at the wall,as if running a sword through an invisible foe, and glaring savagelyover his spectacles, and then again resuming his walk, mutteringindistinct words, shrugging his shoulders and gesticulating."England is done for," said he, scowling and pointing his finger atsomeone unseen. "Mr. Pitt, as a traitor to the nation and to the rightsof man, is sentenced to..." But before Pierre--who at that momentimagined himself to be Napoleon in person and to have just effected thedangerous crossing of the Straits of Dover and captured London--couldpronounce Pitt's sentence, he saw a well-built and handsome youngofficer entering his room. Pierre paused. He had left Moscow when Boriswas a boy of fourteen, and had quite forgotten him, but in his usualimpulsive and hearty way he took Boris by the hand with a friendlysmile."Do you remember me?" asked Boris quietly with a pleasant smile. "I havecome with my mother to see the count, but it seems he is not well.""Yes, it seems he is ill. People are always disturbing him," answeredPierre, trying to remember who this young man was.Boris felt that Pierre did not recognize him but did not consider itnecessary to introduce himself, and without experiencing the leastembarrassment looked Pierre straight in the face."Count Rostov asks you to come to dinner today," said he, after aconsiderable pause which made Pierre feel uncomfortable."Ah, Count Rostov!" exclaimed Pierre joyfully. "Then you are his son,Ilya? Only fancy, I didn't know you at first. Do you remember how wewent to the Sparrow Hills with Madame Jacquot?... It's such an age...""You are mistaken," said Boris deliberately, with a bold and slightlysarcastic smile. "I am Boris, son of Princess Anna MikhaylovnaDrubetskaya. Rostov, the father, is Ilya, and his son is Nicholas. Inever knew any Madame Jacquot."Pierre shook his head and arms as if attacked by mosquitoes or bees."Oh dear, what am I thinking about? I've mixed everything up. One has somany relatives in Moscow! So you are Boris? Of course. Well, now we knowwhere we are. And what do you think of the Boulogne expedition? TheEnglish will come off badly, you know, if Napoleon gets across theChannel. I think the expedition is quite feasible. If only Villeneuvedoesn't make a mess of things!"Boris knew nothing about the Boulogne expedition; he did not read thepapers and it was the first time he had heard Villeneuve's name."We here in Moscow are more occupied with dinner parties and scandalthan with politics," said he in his quiet ironical tone. "I know nothingabout it and have not thought about it. Moscow is chiefly busy withgossip," he continued. "Just now they are talking about you and yourfather."Pierre smiled in his good-natured way as if afraid for his companion'ssake that the latter might say something he would afterwards regret. ButBoris spoke distinctly, clearly, and dryly, looking straight intoPierre's eyes."Moscow has nothing else to do but gossip," Boris went on. "Everybody iswondering to whom the count will leave his fortune, though he mayperhaps outlive us all, as I sincerely hope he will...""Yes, it is all very horrid," interrupted Pierre, "very horrid."Pierre was still afraid that this officer might inadvertently saysomething disconcerting to himself."And it must seem to you," said Boris flushing slightly, but notchanging his tone or attitude, "it must seem to you that everyone istrying to get something out of the rich man?""So it does," thought Pierre."But I just wish to say, to avoid misunderstandings, that you are quitemistaken if you reckon me or my mother among such people. We are verypoor, but for my own part at any rate, for the very reason that yourfather is rich, I don't regard myself as a relation of his, and neitherI nor my mother would ever ask or take anything from him."For a long time Pierre could not understand, but when he did, he jumpedup from the sofa, seized Boris under the elbow in his quick, clumsy way,and, blushing far more than Boris, began to speak with a feeling ofmingled shame and vexation."Well, this is strange! Do you suppose I... who could think?... I knowvery well..."But Boris again interrupted him."I am glad I have spoken out fully. Perhaps you did not like it? Youmust excuse me," said he, putting Pierre at ease instead of being put atease by him, "but I hope I have not offended you. I always make it arule to speak out... Well, what answer am I to take? Will you come todinner at the Rostovs'?"And Boris, having apparently relieved himself of an onerous duty andextricated himself from an awkward situation and placed another in it,became quite pleasant again."No, but I say," said Pierre, calming down, "you are a wonderful fellow!What you have just said is good, very good. Of course you don't know me.We have not met for such a long time... not since we were children. Youmight think that I... I understand, quite understand. I could not havedone it myself, I should not have had the courage, but it's splendid. Iam very glad to have made your acquaintance. It's queer," he added aftera pause, "that you should have suspected me!" He began to laugh. "Well,what of it! I hope we'll get better acquainted," and he pressed Boris'hand. "Do you know, I have not once been in to see the count. He has notsent for me.... I am sorry for him as a man, but what can one do?""And so you think Napoleon will manage to get an army across?" askedBoris with a smile.Pierre saw that Boris wished to change the subject, and being of thesame mind he began explaining the advantages and disadvantages of theBoulogne expedition.A footman came in to summon Boris--the princess was going. Pierre, inorder to make Boris' better acquaintance, promised to come to dinner,and warmly pressing his hand looked affectionately over his spectaclesinto Boris' eyes. After he had gone Pierre continued pacing up and downthe room for a long time, no longer piercing an imaginary foe with hisimaginary sword, but smiling at the remembrance of that pleasant,intelligent, and resolute young man.As often happens in early youth, especially to one who leads a lonelylife, he felt an unaccountable tenderness for this young man and made uphis mind that they would be friends.Prince Vasili saw the princess off. She held a handkerchief to her eyesand her face was tearful."It is dreadful, dreadful!" she was saying, "but cost me what it may Ishall do my duty. I will come and spend the night. He must not be leftlike this. Every moment is precious. I can't think why his nieces put itoff. Perhaps God will help me to find a way to prepare him!... Adieu,Prince! May God support you...""Adieu, ma bonne," answered Prince Vasili turning away from her."Oh, he is in a dreadful state," said the mother to her son when theywere in the carriage. "He hardly recognizes anybody.""I don't understand, Mamma--what is his attitude to Pierre?" asked theson."The will will show that, my dear; our fate also depends on it.""But why do you expect that he will leave us anything?""Ah, my dear! He is so rich, and we are so poor!""Well, that is hardly a sufficient reason, Mamma...""Oh, Heaven! How ill he is!" exclaimed the mother.CHAPTER XVIIAfter Anna Mikhaylovna had driven off with her son to visit Count CyrilVladimirovich Bezukhov, Countess Rostova sat for a long time all aloneapplying her handkerchief to her eyes. At last she rang."What is the matter with you, my dear?" she said crossly to the maid whokept her waiting some minutes. "Don't you wish to serve me? Then I'llfind you another place."The countess was upset by her friend's sorrow and humiliating poverty,and was therefore out of sorts, a state of mind which with her alwaysfound expression in calling her maid "my dear" and speaking to her withexaggerated politeness."I am very sorry, ma'am," answered the maid."Ask the count to come to me."The count came waddling in to see his wife with a rather guilty look asusual."Well, little countess? What a saute of game au madere we are to have,my dear! I tasted it. The thousand rubles I paid for Taras were not ill-spent. He is worth it!"He sat down by his wife, his elbows on his knees and his hands rufflinghis gray hair."What are your commands, little countess?""You see, my dear... What's that mess?" she said, pointing to hiswaistcoat. "It's the saute, most likely," she added with a smile. "Well,you see, Count, I want some money."Her face became sad."Oh, little countess!"... and the count began bustling to get out hispocketbook."I want a great deal, Count! I want five hundred rubles," and taking outher cambric handkerchief she began wiping her husband's waistcoat."Yes, immediately, immediately! Hey, who's there?" he called out in atone only used by persons who are certain that those they call will rushto obey the summons. "Send Dmitri to me!"Dmitri, a man of good family who had been brought up in the count'shouse and now managed all his affairs, stepped softly into the room."This is what I want, my dear fellow," said the count to the deferentialyoung man who had entered. "Bring me..." he reflected a moment, "yes,bring me seven hundred rubles, yes! But mind, don't bring me suchtattered and dirty notes as last time, but nice clean ones for thecountess.""Yes, Dmitri, clean ones, please," said the countess, sighing deeply."When would you like them, your excellency?" asked Dmitri. "Allow me toinform you... But, don't be uneasy," he added, noticing that the countwas beginning to breathe heavily and quickly which was always a sign ofapproaching anger. "I was forgetting... Do you wish it brought at once?""Yes, yes; just so! Bring it. Give it to the countess.""What a treasure that Dmitri is," added the count with a smile when theyoung man had departed. "There is never any 'impossible' with him.That's a thing I hate! Everything is possible.""Ah, money, Count, money! How much sorrow it causes in the world," saidthe countess. "But I am in great need of this sum.""You, my little countess, are a notorious spendthrift," said the count,and having kissed his wife's hand he went back to his study.When Anna Mikhaylovna returned from Count Bezukhov's the money, all inclean notes, was lying ready under a handkerchief on the countess'little table, and Anna Mikhaylovna noticed that something was agitatingher."Well, my dear?" asked the countess."Oh, what a terrible state he is in! One would not know him, he is soill! I was only there a few moments and hardly said a word...""Annette, for heaven's sake don't refuse me," the countess began, with ablush that looked very strange on her thin, dignified, elderly face, andshe took the money from under the handkerchief.Anna Mikhaylovna instantly guessed her intention and stooped to be readyto embrace the countess at the appropriate moment."This is for Boris from me, for his outfit."Anna Mikhaylovna was already embracing her and weeping. The countesswept too. They wept because they were friends, and because they werekindhearted, and because they--friends from childhood--had to thinkabout such a base thing as money, and because their youth was over....But those tears were pleasant to them both.CHAPTER XVIIICountess Rostova, with her daughters and a large number of guests, wasalready seated in the drawing room. The count took the gentlemen intohis study and showed them his choice collection of Turkish pipes. Fromtime to time he went out to ask: "Hasn't she come yet?" They wereexpecting Marya Dmitrievna Akhrosimova, known in society as le terribledragon, a lady distinguished not for wealth or rank, but for commonsense and frank plainness of speech. Marya Dmitrievna was known to theImperial family as well as to all Moscow and Petersburg, and both citieswondered at her, laughed privately at her rudenesses, and told goodstories about her, while none the less all without exception respectedand feared her.In the count's room, which was full of tobacco smoke, they talked of warthat had been announced in a manifesto, and about the recruiting. Noneof them had yet seen the manifesto, but they all knew it had appeared.The count sat on the sofa between two guests who were smoking andtalking. He neither smoked nor talked, but bending his head first to oneside and then to the other watched the smokers with evident pleasure andlistened to the conversation of his two neighbors, whom he egged onagainst each other.One of them was a sallow, clean-shaven civilian with a thin and wrinkledface, already growing old, though he was dressed like a most fashionableyoung man. He sat with his legs up on the sofa as if quite at home and,having stuck an amber mouthpiece far into his mouth, was inhaling thesmoke spasmodically and screwing up his eyes. This was an old bachelor,Shinshin, a cousin of the countess', a man with "a sharp tongue" as theysaid in Moscow society. He seemed to be condescending to his companion.The latter, a fresh, rosy officer of the Guards, irreproachably washed,brushed, and buttoned, held his pipe in the middle of his mouth and withred lips gently inhaled the smoke, letting it escape from his handsomemouth in rings. This was Lieutenant Berg, an officer in the Semenovregiment with whom Boris was to travel to join the army, and about whomNatasha had teased her elder sister Vera, speaking of Berg as her"intended." The count sat between them and listened attentively. Hisfavorite occupation when not playing boston, a card game he was veryfond of, was that of listener, especially when he succeeded in settingtwo loquacious talkers at one another."Well, then, old chap, mon tres honorable Alphonse Karlovich," saidShinshin, laughing ironically and mixing the most ordinary Russianexpressions with the choicest French phrases--which was a peculiarity ofhis speech. "Vous comptez vous faire des rentes sur l'etat; * you wantto make something out of your company?"* You expect to make an income out of the government."No, Peter Nikolaevich; I only want to show that in the cavalry theadvantages are far less than in the infantry. Just consider my ownposition now, Peter Nikolaevich..."Berg always spoke quietly, politely, and with great precision. Hisconversation always related entirely to himself; he would remain calmand silent when the talk related to any topic that had no direct bearingon himself. He could remain silent for hours without being at all putout of countenance himself or making others uncomfortable, but as soonas the conversation concerned himself he would begin to talkcircumstantially and with evident satisfaction."Consider my position, Peter Nikolaevich. Were I in the cavalry I shouldget not more than two hundred rubles every four months, even with therank of lieutenant; but as it is I receive two hundred and thirty," saidhe, looking at Shinshin and the count with a joyful, pleasant smile, asif it were obvious to him that his success must always be the chiefdesire of everyone else."Besides that, Peter Nikolaevich, by exchanging into the Guards I shallbe in a more prominent position," continued Berg, "and vacancies occurmuch more frequently in the Foot Guards. Then just think what can bedone with two hundred and thirty rubles! I even manage to put a littleaside and to send something to my father," he went on, emitting a smokering."La balance y est... * A German knows how to skin a flint, as theproverb says," remarked Shinshin, moving his pipe to the other side ofhis mouth and winking at the count.* So that squares matters.The count burst out laughing. The other guests seeing that Shinshin wastalking came up to listen. Berg, oblivious of irony or indifference,continued to explain how by exchanging into the Guards he had alreadygained a step on his old comrades of the Cadet Corps; how in wartime thecompany commander might get killed and he, as senior in the company,might easily succeed to the post; how popular he was with everyone inthe regiment, and how satisfied his father was with him. Berg evidentlyenjoyed narrating all this, and did not seem to suspect that others,too, might have their own interests. But all he said was so prettilysedate, and the naivete of his youthful egotism was so obvious, that hedisarmed his hearers."Well, my boy, you'll get along wherever you go--foot or horse--thatI'll warrant," said Shinshin, patting him on the shoulder and taking hisfeet off the sofa.Berg smiled joyously. The count, by his guests, went into the drawingroom.It was just the moment before a big dinner when the assembled guests,expecting the summons to zakuska, * avoid engaging in any longconversation but think it necessary to move about and talk, in order toshow that they are not at all impatient for their food. The host andhostess look toward the door, and now and then glance at one another,and the visitors try to guess from these glances who, or what, they arewaiting for--some important relation who has not yet arrived, or a dishthat is not yet ready.* Hors d'oeuvres.Pierre had come just at dinnertime and was sitting awkwardly in themiddle of the drawing room on the first chair he had come across,blocking the way for everyone. The countess tried to make him talk, buthe went on naively looking around through his spectacles as if in searchof somebody and answered all her questions in monosyllables. He was inthe way and was the only one who did not notice the fact. Most of theguests, knowing of the affair with the bear, looked with curiosity atthis big, stout, quiet man, wondering how such a clumsy, modest fellowcould have played such a prank on a policeman."You have only lately arrived?" the countess asked him."Oui, madame," replied he, looking around him."You have not yet seen my husband?""Non, madame." He smiled quite inappropriately."You have been in Paris recently, I believe? I suppose it's veryinteresting.""Very interesting."The countess exchanged glances with Anna Mikhaylovna. The latterunderstood that she was being asked to entertain this young man, andsitting down beside him she began to speak about his father; but heanswered her, as he had the countess, only in monosyllables. The otherguests were all conversing with one another. "The Razumovskis... It wascharming... You are very kind... Countess Apraksina..." was heard on allsides. The countess rose and went into the ballroom."Marya Dmitrievna?" came her voice from there."Herself," came the answer in a rough voice, and Marya Dmitrievnaentered the room.All the unmarried ladies and even the married ones except the veryoldest rose. Marya Dmitrievna paused at the door. Tall and stout,holding high her fifty-year-old head with its gray curls, she stoodsurveying the guests, and leisurely arranged her wide sleeves as ifrolling them up. Marya Dmitrievna always spoke in Russian."Health and happiness to her whose name day we are keeping and to herchildren," she said, in her loud, full-toned voice which drowned allothers. "Well, you old sinner," she went on, turning to the count whowas kissing her hand, "you're feeling dull in Moscow, I daresay? Nowhereto hunt with your dogs? But what is to be done, old man? Just see howthese nestlings are growing up," and she pointed to the girls. "You mustlook for husbands for them whether you like it or not....""Well," said she, "how's my Cossack?" (Marya Dmitrievna always calledNatasha a Cossack) and she stroked the child's arm as she came upfearless and gay to kiss her hand. "I know she's a scamp of a girl, butI like her."She took a pair of pear-shaped ruby earrings from her huge reticule and,having given them to the rosy Natasha, who beamed with the pleasure ofher saint's-day fete, turned away at once and addressed herself toPierre."Eh, eh, friend! Come here a bit," said she, assuming a soft high toneof voice. "Come here, my friend..." and she ominously tucked up hersleeves still higher. Pierre approached, looking at her in a childlikeway through his spectacles."Come nearer, come nearer, friend! I used to be the only one to tellyour father the truth when he was in favor, and in your case it's myevident duty." She paused. All were silent, expectant of what was tofollow, for this was clearly only a prelude."A fine lad! My word! A fine lad!... His father lies on his deathbed andhe amuses himself setting a policeman astride a bear! For shame, sir,for shame! It would be better if you went to the war."She turned away and gave her hand to the count, who could hardly keepfrom laughing."Well, I suppose it is time we were at table?" said Marya Dmitrievna.The count went in first with Marya Dmitrievna, the countess followed onthe arm of a colonel of hussars, a man of importance to them becauseNicholas was to go with him to the regiment; then came Anna Mikhaylovnawith Shinshin. Berg gave his arm to Vera. The smiling Julie Karaginawent in with Nicholas. After them other couples followed, filling thewhole dining hall, and last of all the children, tutors, and governessesfollowed singly. The footmen began moving about, chairs scraped, theband struck up in the gallery, and the guests settled down in theirplaces. Then the strains of the count's household band were replaced bythe clatter of knives and forks, the voices of visitors, and the softsteps of the footmen. At one end of the table sat the countess withMarya Dmitrievna on her right and Anna Mikhaylovna on her left, theother lady visitors were farther down. At the other end sat the count,with the hussar colonel on his left and Shinshin and the other malevisitors on his right. Midway down the long table on one side sat thegrownup young people: Vera beside Berg, and Pierre beside Boris; and onthe other side, the children, tutors, and governesses. From behind thecrystal decanters and fruit vases, the count kept glancing at his wifeand her tall cap with its light-blue ribbons, and busily filled hisneighbors' glasses, not neglecting his own. The countess in turn,without omitting her duties as hostess, threw significant glances frombehind the pineapples at her husband whose face and bald head seemed bytheir redness to contrast more than usual with his gray hair. At theladies' end an even chatter of voices was heard all the time, at themen's end the voices sounded louder and louder, especially that of thecolonel of hussars who, growing more and more flushed, ate and drank somuch that the count held him up as a pattern to the other guests. Bergwith tender smiles was saying to Vera that love is not an earthly but aheavenly feeling. Boris was telling his new friend Pierre who the guestswere and exchanging glances with Natasha, who was sitting opposite.Pierre spoke little but examined the new faces, and ate a great deal. Ofthe two soups he chose turtle with savory patties and went on to thegame without omitting a single dish or one of the wines. These latterthe butler thrust mysteriously forward, wrapped in a napkin, from behindthe next man's shoulders and whispered: "Dry Madeira"... "Hungarian"...or "Rhine wine" as the case might be. Of the four crystal glassesengraved with the count's monogram that stood before his plate, Pierreheld out one at random and drank with enjoyment, gazing with ever-increasing amiability at the other guests. Natasha, who sat opposite,was looking at Boris as girls of thirteen look at the boy they are inlove with and have just kissed for the first time. Sometimes that samelook fell on Pierre, and that funny lively little girl's look made himinclined to laugh without knowing why.Nicholas sat at some distance from Sonya, beside Julie Karagina, to whomhe was again talking with the same involuntary smile. Sonya wore acompany smile but was evidently tormented by jealousy; now she turnedpale, now blushed and strained every nerve to overhear what Nicholas andJulie were saying to one another. The governess kept looking rounduneasily as if preparing to resent any slight that might be put upon thechildren. The German tutor was trying to remember all the dishes, wines,and kinds of dessert, in order to send a full description of the dinnerto his people in Germany; and he felt greatly offended when the butlerwith a bottle wrapped in a napkin passed him by. He frowned, trying toappear as if he did not want any of that wine, but was mortified becauseno one would understand that it was not to quench his thirst or fromgreediness that he wanted it, but simply from a conscientious desire forknowledge.CHAPTER XIXAt the men's end of the table the talk grew more and more animated. Thecolonel told them that the declaration of war had already appeared inPetersburg and that a copy, which he had himself seen, had that day beenforwarded by courier to the commander-in-chief."And why the deuce are we going to fight Bonaparte?" remarked Shinshin."He has stopped Austria's cackle and I fear it will be our turn next."The colonel was a stout, tall, plethoric German, evidently devoted tothe service and patriotically Russian. He resented Shinshin's remark."It is for the reasson, my goot sir," said he, speaking with a Germanaccent, "for the reasson zat ze Emperor knows zat. He declares in zemanifessto zat he cannot fiew wiz indifference ze danger vreateningRussia and zat ze safety and dignity of ze Empire as vell as ze sanctityof its alliances..." he spoke this last word with particular emphasis asif in it lay the gist of the matter.Then with the unerring official memory that characterized him herepeated from the opening words of the manifesto:... and the wish, which constitutes the Emperor's sole and absolute aim--to establish peace in Europe on firm foundations--has now decided himto despatch part of the army abroad and to create a new condition forthe attainment of that purpose."Zat, my dear sir, is vy..." he concluded, drinking a tumbler of winewith dignity and looking to the count for approval."Connaissez-vous le Proverbe: * 'Jerome, Jerome, do not roam, but turnspindles at home!'?" said Shinshin, puckering his brows and smiling."Cela nous convient a merveille.*(2) Suvorov now--he knew what he wasabout; yet they beat him a plate couture,*(3) and where are we to findSuvorovs now? Je vous demande un peu,"*(4) said he, continually changingfrom French to Russian.*Do you know the proverb?*(2) That suits us down to the ground.*(3) Hollow.*(4) I just ask you that."Ve must vight to the last tr-r-op of our plood!" said the colonel,thumping the table; "and ve must tie for our Emperor, and zen all villpe vell. And ve must discuss it as little as po-o-ossible"... he dweltparticularly on the word possible... "as po-o-ossible," he ended, againturning to the count. "Zat is how ve old hussars look at it, and zere'san end of it! And how do you, a young man and a young hussar, how do youjudge of it?" he added, addressing Nicholas, who when he heard that thewar was being discussed had turned from his partner with eyes and earsintent on the colonel."I am quite of your opinion," replied Nicholas, flaming up, turning hisplate round and moving his wineglasses about with as much decision anddesperation as though he were at that moment facing some great danger."I am convinced that we Russians must die or conquer," he concluded,conscious--as were others--after the words were uttered that his remarkswere too enthusiastic and emphatic for the occasion and were thereforeawkward."What you said just now was splendid!" said his partner Julie.Sonya trembled all over and blushed to her ears and behind them and downto her neck and shoulders while Nicholas was speaking.Pierre listened to the colonel's speech and nodded approvingly."That's fine," said he."The young man's a real hussar!" shouted the colonel, again thumping thetable."What are you making such a noise about over there?" Marya Dmitrievna'sdeep voice suddenly inquired from the other end of the table. "What areyou thumping the table for?" she demanded of the hussar, "and why areyou exciting yourself? Do you think the French are here?""I am speaking ze truce," replied the hussar with a smile."It's all about the war," the count shouted down the table. "You know myson's going, Marya Dmitrievna? My son is going.""I have four sons in the army but still I don't fret. It is all in God'shands. You may die in your bed or God may spare you in a battle,"replied Marya Dmitrievna's deep voice, which easily carried the wholelength of the table."That's true!"Once more the conversations concentrated, the ladies' at the one end andthe men's at the other."You won't ask," Natasha's little brother was saying; "I know you won'task!""I will," replied Natasha.Her face suddenly flushed with reckless and joyous resolution. She halfrose, by a glance inviting Pierre, who sat opposite, to listen to whatwas coming, and turning to her mother:"Mamma!" rang out the clear contralto notes of her childish voice,audible the whole length of the table."What is it?" asked the countess, startled; but seeing by her daughter'sface that it was only mischief, she shook a finger at her sternly with athreatening and forbidding movement of her head.The conversation was hushed."Mamma! What sweets are we going to have?" and Natasha's voice soundedstill more firm and resolute.The countess tried to frown, but could not. Marya Dmitrievna shook herfat finger."Cossack!" she said threateningly.Most of the guests, uncertain how to regard this sally, looked at theelders."You had better take care!" said the countess."Mamma! What sweets are we going to have?" Natasha again cried boldly,with saucy gaiety, confident that her prank would be taken in good part.Sonya and fat little Petya doubled up with laughter."You see! I have asked," whispered Natasha to her little brother and toPierre, glancing at him again."Ice pudding, but you won't get any," said Marya Dmitrievna.Natasha saw there was nothing to be afraid of and so she braved evenMarya Dmitrievna."Marya Dmitrievna! What kind of ice pudding? I don't like ice cream.""Carrot ices.""No! What kind, Marya Dmitrievna? What kind?" she almost screamed; "Iwant to know!"Marya Dmitrievna and the countess burst out laughing, and all the guestsjoined in. Everyone laughed, not at Marya Dmitrievna's answer but at theincredible boldness and smartness of this little girl who had dared totreat Marya Dmitrievna in this fashion.Natasha only desisted when she had been told that there would bepineapple ice. Before the ices, champagne was served round. The bandagain struck up, the count and countess kissed, and the guests, leavingtheir seats, went up to "congratulate" the countess, and reached acrossthe table to clink glasses with the count, with the children, and withone another. Again the footmen rushed about, chairs scraped, and in thesame order in which they had entered but with redder faces, the guestsreturned to the drawing room and to the count's study.CHAPTER XXThe card tables were drawn out, sets made up for boston, and the count'svisitors settled themselves, some in the two drawing rooms, some in thesitting room, some in the library.The count, holding his cards fanwise, kept himself with difficulty fromdropping into his usual after-dinner nap, and laughed at everything. Theyoung people, at the countess' instigation, gathered round theclavichord and harp. Julie by general request played first. After shehad played a little air with variations on the harp, she joined theother young ladies in begging Natasha and Nicholas, who were noted fortheir musical talent, to sing something. Natasha, who was treated asthough she were grown up, was evidently very proud of this but at thesame time felt shy."What shall we sing?" she said."'The Brook,'" suggested Nicholas."Well, then, let's be quick. Boris, come here," said Natasha. "But whereis Sonya?"She looked round and seeing that her friend was not in the room ran tolook for her.Running into Sonya's room and not finding her there, Natasha ran to thenursery, but Sonya was not there either. Natasha concluded that she mustbe on the chest in the passage. The chest in the passage was the placeof mourning for the younger female generation in the Rostov household.And there in fact was Sonya lying face downward on Nurse's dirty featherbed on the top of the chest, crumpling her gauzy pink dress under her,hiding her face with her slender fingers, and sobbing so convulsivelythat her bare little shoulders shook. Natasha's face, which had been soradiantly happy all that saint's day, suddenly changed: her eyes becamefixed, and then a shiver passed down her broad neck and the corners ofher mouth drooped."Sonya! What is it? What is the matter?... Oo... Oo... Oo...!" AndNatasha's large mouth widened, making her look quite ugly, and she beganto wail like a baby without knowing why, except that Sonya was crying.Sonya tried to lift her head to answer but could not, and hid her facestill deeper in the bed. Natasha wept, sitting on the blue-stripedfeather bed and hugging her friend. With an effort Sonya sat up andbegan wiping her eyes and explaining."Nicholas is going away in a week's time, his... papers... have come...he told me himself... but still I should not cry," and she showed apaper she held in her hand--with the verses Nicholas had written,"still, I should not cry, but you can't... no one can understand... whata soul he has!"And she began to cry again because he had such a noble soul."It's all very well for you... I am not envious... I love you and Borisalso," she went on, gaining a little strength; "he is nice... there areno difficulties in your way.... But Nicholas is my cousin... one wouldhave to... the Metropolitan himself... and even then it can't be done.And besides, if she tells Mamma" (Sonya looked upon the countess as hermother and called her so) "that I am spoiling Nicholas' career and amheartless and ungrateful, while truly... God is my witness," and shemade the sign of the cross, "I love her so much, and all of you, onlyVera... And what for? What have I done to her? I am so grateful to youthat I would willingly sacrifice everything, only I have nothing...."Sonya could not continue, and again hid her face in her hands and in thefeather bed. Natasha began consoling her, but her face showed that sheunderstood all the gravity of her friend's trouble."Sonya," she suddenly exclaimed, as if she had guessed the true reasonof her friend's sorrow, "I'm sure Vera has said something to you sincedinner? Hasn't she?""Yes, these verses Nicholas wrote himself and I copied some others, andshe found them on my table and said she'd show them to Mamma, and that Iwas ungrateful, and that Mamma would never allow him to marry me, butthat he'll marry Julie. You see how he's been with her all day...Natasha, what have I done to deserve it?..."And again she began to sob, more bitterly than before. Natasha liftedher up, hugged her, and, smiling through her tears, began comfortingher."Sonya, don't believe her, darling! Don't believe her! Do you rememberhow we and Nicholas, all three of us, talked in the sitting room aftersupper? Why, we settled how everything was to be. I don't quite rememberhow, but don't you remember that it could all be arranged and how niceit all was? There's Uncle Shinshin's brother has married his firstcousin. And we are only second cousins, you know. And Boris says it isquite possible. You know I have told him all about it. And he is soclever and so good!" said Natasha. "Don't you cry, Sonya, dear love,darling Sonya!" and she kissed her and laughed. "Vera's spiteful; nevermind her! And all will come right and she won't say anything to Mamma.Nicholas will tell her himself, and he doesn't care at all for Julie."Natasha kissed her on the hair.Sonya sat up. The little kitten brightened, its eyes shone, and itseemed ready to lift its tail, jump down on its soft paws, and beginplaying with the ball of worsted as a kitten should."Do you think so?... Really? Truly?" she said, quickly smoothing herfrock and hair."Really, truly!" answered Natasha, pushing in a crisp lock that hadstrayed from under her friend's plaits.Both laughed."Well, let's go and sing 'The Brook.'""Come along!""Do you know, that fat Pierre who sat opposite me is so funny!" saidNatasha, stopping suddenly. "I feel so happy!"And she set off at a run along the passage.Sonya, shaking off some down which clung to her and tucking away theverses in the bosom of her dress close to her bony little chest, ranafter Natasha down the passage into the sitting room with flushed faceand light, joyous steps. At the visitors' request the young people sangthe quartette, "The Brook," with which everyone was delighted. ThenNicholas sang a song he had just learned:At nighttime in the moon's fair glow How sweet, as fancies wander free,To feel that in this world there's one Who still is thinking but ofthee!That while her fingers touch the harp Wafting sweet music o'er the lea,It is for thee thus swells her heart, Sighing its message out to thee...A day or two, then bliss unspoilt, But oh! till then I cannot live!...He had not finished the last verse before the young people began to getready to dance in the large hall, and the sound of the feet and thecoughing of the musicians were heard from the gallery.Pierre was sitting in the drawing-room where Shinshin had engaged him,as a man recently returned from abroad, in a political conversation inwhich several others joined but which bored Pierre. When the music beganNatasha came in and walking straight up to Pierre said, laughing andblushing:"Mamma told me to ask you to join the dancers.""I am afraid of mixing the figures," Pierre replied; "but if you will bemy teacher..." And lowering his big arm he offered it to the slenderlittle girl.While the couples were arranging themselves and the musicians tuning up,Pierre sat down with his little partner. Natasha was perfectly happy;she was dancing with a grown-up man, who had been abroad. She wassitting in a conspicuous place and talking to him like a grown-up lady.She had a fan in her hand that one of the ladies had given her to hold.Assuming quite the pose of a society woman (heaven knows when and whereshe had learned it) she talked with her partner, fanning herself andsmiling over the fan."Dear, dear! Just look at her!" exclaimed the countess as she crossedthe ballroom, pointing to Natasha.Natasha blushed and laughed."Well, really, Mamma! Why should you? What is there to be surprised at?"In the midst of the third ecossaise there was a clatter of chairs beingpushed back in the sitting room where the count and Marya Dmitrievna hadbeen playing cards with the majority of the more distinguished and oldervisitors. They now, stretching themselves after sitting so long, andreplacing their purses and pocketbooks, entered the ballroom. First cameMarya Dmitrievna and the count, both with merry countenances. The count,with playful ceremony somewhat in ballet style, offered his bent arm toMarya Dmitrievna. He drew himself up, a smile of debonair gallantry litup his face and as soon as the last figure of the ecossaise was ended,he clapped his hands to the musicians and shouted up to their gallery,addressing the first violin:"Semen! Do you know the Daniel Cooper?"This was the count's favorite dance, which he had danced in his youth.(Strictly speaking, Daniel Cooper was one figure of the anglaise.)"Look at Papa!" shouted Natasha to the whole company, and quiteforgetting that she was dancing with a grown-up partner she bent hercurly head to her knees and made the whole room ring with her laughter.And indeed everybody in the room looked with a smile of pleasure at thejovial old gentleman, who standing beside his tall and stout partner,Marya Dmitrievna, curved his arms, beat time, straightened hisshoulders, turned out his toes, tapped gently with his foot, and, by asmile that broadened his round face more and more, prepared theonlookers for what was to follow. As soon as the provocatively gaystrains of Daniel Cooper (somewhat resembling those of a merry peasantdance) began to sound, all the doorways of the ballroom were suddenlyfilled by the domestic serfs--the men on one side and the women on theother--who with beaming faces had come to see their master making merry."Just look at the master! A regular eagle he is!" loudly remarked thenurse, as she stood in one of the doorways.The count danced well and knew it. But his partner could not and did notwant to dance well. Her enormous figure stood erect, her powerful armshanging down (she had handed her reticule to the countess), and only herstern but handsome face really joined in the dance. What was expressedby the whole of the count's plump figure, in Marya Dmitrievna foundexpression only in her more and more beaming face and quivering nose.But if the count, getting more and more into the swing of it, charmedthe spectators by the unexpectedness of his adroit maneuvers and theagility with which he capered about on his light feet, Marya Dmitrievnaproduced no less impression by slight exertions--the least effort tomove her shoulders or bend her arms when turning, or stamp her foot--which everyone appreciated in view of her size and habitual severity.The dance grew livelier and livelier. The other couples could notattract a moment's attention to their own evolutions and did not eventry to do so. All were watching the count and Marya Dmitrievna. Natashakept pulling everyone by sleeve or dress, urging them to "look at Papa!"though as it was they never took their eyes off the couple. In theintervals of the dance the count, breathing deeply, waved and shouted tothe musicians to play faster. Faster, faster, and faster; lightly, morelightly, and yet more lightly whirled the count, flying round MaryaDmitrievna, now on his toes, now on his heels; until, turning hispartner round to her seat, he executed the final pas, raising his softfoot backwards, bowing his perspiring head, smiling and making a widesweep with his arm, amid a thunder of applause and laughter led byNatasha. Both partners stood still, breathing heavily and wiping theirfaces with their cambric handkerchiefs."That's how we used to dance in our time, ma chere," said the count."That was a Daniel Cooper!" exclaimed Marya Dmitrievna, tucking up hersleeves and puffing heavily.CHAPTER XXIWhile in the Rostovs' ballroom the sixth anglaise was being danced, to atune in which the weary musicians blundered, and while tired footmen andcooks were getting the supper, Count Bezukhov had a sixth stroke. Thedoctors pronounced recovery impossible. After a mute confession,communion was administered to the dying man, preparations made for thesacrament of unction, and in his house there was the bustle and thrillof suspense usual at such moments. Outside the house, beyond the gates,a group of undertakers, who hid whenever a carriage drove up, waited inexpectation of an important order for an expensive funeral. The MilitaryGovernor of Moscow, who had been assiduous in sending aides-de-camp toinquire after the count's health, came himself that evening to bid alast farewell to the celebrated grandee of Catherine's court, CountBezukhov.The magnificent reception room was crowded. Everyone stood uprespectfully when the Military Governor, having stayed about half anhour alone with the dying man, passed out, slightly acknowledging theirbows and trying to escape as quickly as possible from the glances fixedon him by the doctors, clergy, and relatives of the family. PrinceVasili, who had grown thinner and paler during the last few days,escorted him to the door, repeating something to him several times inlow tones.When the Military Governor had gone, Prince Vasili sat down all alone ona chair in the ballroom, crossing one leg high over the other, leaninghis elbow on his knee and covering his face with his hand. After sittingso for a while he rose, and, looking about him with frightened eyes,went with unusually hurried steps down the long corridor leading to theback of the house, to the room of the eldest princess.Those who were in the dimly lit reception room spoke in nervouswhispers, and, whenever anyone went into or came from the dying man'sroom, grew silent and gazed with eyes full of curiosity or expectancy athis door, which creaked slightly when opened."The limits of human life... are fixed and may not be o'erpassed," saidan old priest to a lady who had taken a seat beside him and waslistening naively to his words."I wonder, is it not too late to administer unction?" asked the lady,adding the priest's clerical title, as if she had no opinion of her ownon the subject."Ah, madam, it is a great sacrament," replied the priest, passing hishand over the thin grizzled strands of hair combed back across his baldhead."Who was that? The Military Governor himself?" was being asked at theother side of the room. "How young-looking he is!""Yes, and he is over sixty. I hear the count no longer recognizesanyone. They wished to administer the sacrament of unction.""I knew someone who received that sacrament seven times."The second princess had just come from the sickroom with her eyes redfrom weeping and sat down beside Dr. Lorrain, who was sitting in agraceful pose under a portrait of Catherine, leaning his elbow on atable."Beautiful," said the doctor in answer to a remark about the weather."The weather is beautiful, Princess; and besides, in Moscow one feels asif one were in the country.""Yes, indeed," replied the princess with a sigh. "So he may havesomething to drink?"Lorrain considered."Has he taken his medicine?""Yes."The doctor glanced at his watch."Take a glass of boiled water and put a pinch of cream of tartar," andhe indicated with his delicate fingers what he meant by a pinch."Dere has neffer been a gase," a German doctor was saying to an aide-de-camp, "dat one liffs after de sird stroke.""And what a well-preserved man he was!" remarked the aide-de-camp. "Andwho will inherit his wealth?" he added in a whisper."It von't go begging," replied the German with a smile.Everyone again looked toward the door, which creaked as the secondprincess went in with the drink she had prepared according to Lorrain'sinstructions. The German doctor went up to Lorrain."Do you think he can last till morning?" asked the German, addressingLorrain in French which he pronounced badly.Lorrain, pursing up his lips, waved a severely negative finger beforehis nose."Tonight, not later," said he in a low voice, and he moved away with adecorous smile of self-satisfaction at being able clearly to understandand state the patient's condition.Meanwhile Prince Vasili had opened the door into the princess' room.In this room it was almost dark; only two tiny lamps were burning beforethe icons and there was a pleasant scent of flowers and burnt pastilles.The room was crowded with small pieces of furniture, whatnots,cupboards, and little tables. The quilt of a high, white feather bed wasjust visible behind a screen. A small dog began to bark."Ah, is it you, cousin?"She rose and smoothed her hair, which was as usual so extremely smooththat it seemed to be made of one piece with her head and covered withvarnish."Has anything happened?" she asked. "I am so terrified.""No, there is no change. I only came to have a talk about business,Catiche," * muttered the prince, seating himself wearily on the chairshe had just vacated. "You have made the place warm, I must say," heremarked. "Well, sit down: let's have a talk."*Catherine."I thought perhaps something had happened," she said with her unchangingstonily severe expression; and, sitting down opposite the prince, sheprepared to listen."I wished to get a nap, mon cousin, but I can't.""Well, my dear?" said Prince Vasili, taking her hand and bending itdownwards as was his habit.It was plain that this "well?" referred to much that they bothunderstood without naming.The princess, who had a straight, rigid body, abnormally long for herlegs, looked directly at Prince Vasili with no sign of emotion in herprominent gray eyes. Then she shook her head and glanced up at the iconswith a sigh. This might have been taken as an expression of sorrow anddevotion, or of weariness and hope of resting before long. Prince Vasiliunderstood it as an expression of weariness."And I?" he said; "do you think it is easier for me? I am as worn out asa post horse, but still I must have a talk with you, Catiche, a veryserious talk."Prince Vasili said no more and his cheeks began to twitch nervously, nowon one side, now on the other, giving his face an unpleasant expressionwhich was never to be seen on it in a drawing room. His eyes too seemedstrange; at one moment they looked impudently sly and at the nextglanced round in alarm.The princess, holding her little dog on her lap with her thin bonyhands, looked attentively into Prince Vasili's eyes evidently resolvednot to be the first to break silence, if she had to wait till morning."Well, you see, my dear princess and cousin, Catherine Semenovna,"continued Prince Vasili, returning to his theme, apparently not withoutan inner struggle; "at such a moment as this one must think ofeverything. One must think of the future, of all of you... I love youall, like children of my own, as you know."The princess continued to look at him without moving, and with the samedull expression."And then of course my family has also to be considered," Prince Vasiliwent on, testily pushing away a little table without looking at her."You know, Catiche, that we--you three sisters, Mamontov, and my wife--are the count's only direct heirs. I know, I know how hard it is for youto talk or think of such matters. It is no easier for me; but, my dear,I am getting on for sixty and must be prepared for anything. Do you knowI have sent for Pierre? The count," pointing to his portrait,"definitely demanded that he should be called."Prince Vasili looked questioningly at the princess, but could not makeout whether she was considering what he had just said or whether she wassimply looking at him."There is one thing I constantly pray God to grant, mon cousin," shereplied, "and it is that He would be merciful to him and would allow hisnoble soul peacefully to leave this...""Yes, yes, of course," interrupted Prince Vasili impatiently, rubbinghis bald head and angrily pulling back toward him the little table thathe had pushed away. "But... in short, the fact is... you know yourselfthat last winter the count made a will by which he left all hisproperty, not to us his direct heirs, but to Pierre.""He has made wills enough!" quietly remarked the princess. "But hecannot leave the estate to Pierre. Pierre is illegitimate.""But, my dear," said Prince Vasili suddenly, clutching the little tableand becoming more animated and talking more rapidly: "what if a letterhas been written to the Emperor in which the count asks for Pierre'slegitimation? Do you understand that in consideration of the count'sservices, his request would be granted?..."The princess smiled as people do who think they know more about thesubject under discussion than those they are talking with."I can tell you more," continued Prince Vasili, seizing her hand, "thatletter was written, though it was not sent, and the Emperor knew of it.The only question is, has it been destroyed or not? If not, then as soonas all is over," and Prince Vasili sighed to intimate what he meant bythe words all is over, "and the count's papers are opened, the will andletter will be delivered to the Emperor, and the petition will certainlybe granted. Pierre will get everything as the legitimate son.""And our share?" asked the princess smiling ironically, as if anythingmight happen, only not that."But, my poor Catiche, it is as clear as daylight! He will then be thelegal heir to everything and you won't get anything. You must know, mydear, whether the will and letter were written, and whether they havebeen destroyed or not. And if they have somehow been overlooked, youought to know where they are, and must find them, because...""What next?" the princess interrupted, smiling sardonically and notchanging the expression of her eyes. "I am a woman, and you think we areall stupid; but I know this: an illegitimate son cannot inherit... unbatard!" * she added, as if supposing that this translation of the wordwould effectively prove to Prince Vasili the invalidity of hiscontention.* A bastard."Well, really, Catiche! Can't you understand! You are so intelligent,how is it you don't see that if the count has written a letter to theEmperor begging him to recognize Pierre as legitimate, it follows thatPierre will not be Pierre but will become Count Bezukhov, and will theninherit everything under the will? And if the will and letter are notdestroyed, then you will have nothing but the consolation of having beendutiful et tout ce qui s'ensuit! * That's certain."* And all that follows therefrom."I know the will was made, but I also know that it is invalid; and you,mon cousin, seem to consider me a perfect fool," said the princess withthe expression women assume when they suppose they are saying somethingwitty and stinging."My dear Princess Catherine Semenovna," began Prince Vasili impatiently,"I came here not to wrangle with you, but to talk about your interestsas with a kinswoman, a good, kind, true relation. And I tell you for thetenth time that if the letter to the Emperor and the will in Pierre'sfavor are among the count's papers, then, my dear girl, you and yoursisters are not heiresses! If you don't believe me, then believe anexpert. I have just been talking to Dmitri Onufrich" (the familysolicitor) "and he says the same."At this a sudden change evidently took place in the princess' ideas; herthin lips grew white, though her eyes did not change, and her voice whenshe began to speak passed through such transitions as she herselfevidently did not expect."That would be a fine thing!" said she. "I never wanted anything and Idon't now."She pushed the little dog off her lap and smoothed her dress."And this is gratitude--this is recognition for those who havesacrificed everything for his sake!" she cried. "It's splendid! Fine! Idon't want anything, Prince.""Yes, but you are not the only one. There are your sisters..." repliedPrince Vasili.But the princess did not listen to him."Yes, I knew it long ago but had forgotten. I knew that I could expectnothing but meanness, deceit, envy, intrigue, and ingratitude--theblackest ingratitude--in this house...""Do you or do you not know where that will is?" insisted Prince Vasili,his cheeks twitching more than ever."Yes, I was a fool! I still believed in people, loved them, andsacrificed myself. But only the base, the vile succeed! I know who hasbeen intriguing!"The princess wished to rise, but the prince held her by the hand. Shehad the air of one who has suddenly lost faith in the whole human race.She gave her companion an angry glance."There is still time, my dear. You must remember, Catiche, that it wasall done casually in a moment of anger, of illness, and was afterwardsforgotten. Our duty, my dear, is to rectify his mistake, to ease hislast moments by not letting him commit this injustice, and not to lethim die feeling that he is rendering unhappy those who...""Who sacrificed everything for him," chimed in the princess, who wouldagain have risen had not the prince still held her fast, "though henever could appreciate it. No, mon cousin," she added with a sigh, "Ishall always remember that in this world one must expect no reward, thatin this world there is neither honor nor justice. In this world one hasto be cunning and cruel.""Now come, come! Be reasonable. I know your excellent heart.""No, I have a wicked heart.""I know your heart," repeated the prince. "I value your friendship andwish you to have as good an opinion of me. Don't upset yourself, and letus talk sensibly while there is still time, be it a day or be it but anhour.... Tell me all you know about the will, and above all where it is.You must know. We will take it at once and show it to the count. He has,no doubt, forgotten it and will wish to destroy it. You understand thatmy sole desire is conscientiously to carry out his wishes; that is myonly reason for being here. I came simply to help him and you.""Now I see it all! I know who has been intriguing--I know!" cried theprincess."That's not the point, my dear.""It's that protege of yours, that sweet Princess Drubetskaya, that AnnaMikhaylovna whom I would not take for a housemaid... the infamous, vilewoman!""Do not let us lose any time...""Ah, don't talk to me! Last winter she wheedled herself in here and toldthe count such vile, disgraceful things about us, especially aboutSophie--I can't repeat them--that it made the count quite ill and hewould not see us for a whole fortnight. I know it was then he wrote thisvile, infamous paper, but I thought the thing was invalid.""We've got to it at last--why did you not tell me about it sooner?""It's in the inlaid portfolio that he keeps under his pillow," said theprincess, ignoring his question. "Now I know! Yes; if I have a sin, agreat sin, it is hatred of that vile woman!" almost shrieked theprincess, now quite changed. "And what does she come worming herself inhere for? But I will give her a piece of my mind. The time will come!"CHAPTER XXIIWhile these conversations were going on in the reception room and theprincess' room, a carriage containing Pierre (who had been sent for) andAnna Mikhaylovna (who found it necessary to accompany him) was drivinginto the court of Count Bezukhov's house. As the wheels rolled softlyover the straw beneath the windows, Anna Mikhaylovna, having turned withwords of comfort to her companion, realized that he was asleep in hiscorner and woke him up. Rousing himself, Pierre followed AnnaMikhaylovna out of the carriage, and only then began to think of theinterview with his dying father which awaited him. He noticed that theyhad not come to the front entrance but to the back door. While he wasgetting down from the carriage steps two men, who looked liketradespeople, ran hurriedly from the entrance and hid in the shadow ofthe wall. Pausing for a moment, Pierre noticed several other men of thesame kind hiding in the shadow of the house on both sides. But neitherAnna Mikhaylovna nor the footman nor the coachman, who could not helpseeing these people, took any notice of them. "It seems to be allright," Pierre concluded, and followed Anna Mikhaylovna. She hurriedlyascended the narrow dimly lit stone staircase, calling to Pierre, whowas lagging behind, to follow. Though he did not see why it wasnecessary for him to go to the count at all, still less why he had to goby the back stairs, yet judging by Anna Mikhaylovna's air of assuranceand haste, Pierre concluded that it was all absolutely necessary.Halfway up the stairs they were almost knocked over by some men who,carrying pails, came running downstairs, their boots clattering. Thesemen pressed close to the wall to let Pierre and Anna Mikhaylovna passand did not evince the least surprise at seeing them there."Is this the way to the princesses' apartments?" asked Anna Mikhaylovnaof one of them."Yes," replied a footman in a bold loud voice, as if anything were nowpermissible; "the door to the left, ma'am.""Perhaps the count did not ask for me," said Pierre when he reached thelanding. "I'd better go to my own room."Anna Mikhaylovna paused and waited for him to come up."Ah, my friend!" she said, touching his arm as she had done her son'swhen speaking to him that afternoon, "believe me I suffer no less thanyou do, but be a man!""But really, hadn't I better go away?" he asked, looking kindly at herover his spectacles."Ah, my dear friend! Forget the wrongs that may have been done you.Think that he is your father... perhaps in the agony of death." Shesighed. "I have loved you like a son from the first. Trust yourself tome, Pierre. I shall not forget your interests."Pierre did not understand a word, but the conviction that all this hadto be grew stronger, and he meekly followed Anna Mikhaylovna who wasalready opening a door.This door led into a back anteroom. An old man, a servant of theprincesses, sat in a corner knitting a stocking. Pierre had never beenin this part of the house and did not even know of the existence ofthese rooms. Anna Mikhaylovna, addressing a maid who was hurrying pastwith a decanter on a tray as "my dear" and "my sweet," asked about theprincess' health and then led Pierre along a stone passage. The firstdoor on the left led into the princesses' apartments. The maid with thedecanter in her haste had not closed the door (everything in the housewas done in haste at that time), and Pierre and Anna Mikhaylovna inpassing instinctively glanced into the room, where Prince Vasili and theeldest princess were sitting close together talking. Seeing them pass,Prince Vasili drew back with obvious impatience, while the princessjumped up and with a gesture of desperation slammed the door with allher might.This action was so unlike her usual composure and the fear depicted onPrince Vasili's face so out of keeping with his dignity that Pierrestopped and glanced inquiringly over his spectacles at his guide. AnnaMikhaylovna evinced no surprise, she only smiled faintly and sighed, asif to say that this was no more than she had expected."Be a man, my friend. I will look after your interests," said she inreply to his look, and went still faster along the passage.Pierre could not make out what it was all about, and still less what"watching over his interests" meant, but he decided that all thesethings had to be. From the passage they went into a large, dimly litroom adjoining the count's reception room. It was one of those sumptuousbut cold apartments known to Pierre only from the front approach, buteven in this room there now stood an empty bath, and water had beenspilled on the carpet. They were met by a deacon with a censer and by aservant who passed out on tiptoe without heeding them. They went intothe reception room familiar to Pierre, with two Italian windows openinginto the conservatory, with its large bust and full length portrait ofCatherine the Great. The same people were still sitting here in almostthe same positions as before, whispering to one another. All becamesilent and turned to look at the pale tear-worn Anna Mikhaylovna as sheentered, and at the big stout figure of Pierre who, hanging his head,meekly followed her.Anna Mikhaylovna's face expressed a consciousness that the decisivemoment had arrived. With the air of a practical Petersburg lady she now,keeping Pierre close beside her, entered the room even more boldly thanthat afternoon. She felt that as she brought with her the person thedying man wished to see, her own admission was assured. Casting a rapidglance at all those in the room and noticing the count's confessorthere, she glided up to him with a sort of amble, not exactly bowing yetseeming to grow suddenly smaller, and respectfully received the blessingfirst of one and then of another priest."God be thanked that you are in time," said she to one of the priests;"all we relatives have been in such anxiety. This young man is thecount's son," she added more softly. "What a terrible moment!"Having said this she went up to the doctor."Dear doctor," said she, "this young man is the count's son. Is thereany hope?"The doctor cast a rapid glance upwards and silently shrugged hisshoulders. Anna Mikhaylovna with just the same movement raised hershoulders and eyes, almost closing the latter, sighed, and moved awayfrom the doctor to Pierre. To him, in a particularly respectful andtenderly sad voice, she said:"Trust in His mercy!" and pointing out a small sofa for him to sit andwait for her, she went silently toward the door that everyone waswatching and it creaked very slightly as she disappeared behind it.Pierre, having made up his mind to obey his monitress implicitly, movedtoward the sofa she had indicated. As soon as Anna Mikhaylovna haddisappeared he noticed that the eyes of all in the room turned to himwith something more than curiosity and sympathy. He noticed that theywhispered to one another, casting significant looks at him with a kindof awe and even servility. A deference such as he had never beforereceived was shown him. A strange lady, the one who had been talking tothe priests, rose and offered him her seat; an aide-de-camp picked upand returned a glove Pierre had dropped; the doctors became respectfullysilent as he passed by, and moved to make way for him. At first Pierrewished to take another seat so as not to trouble the lady, and also topick up the glove himself and to pass round the doctors who were noteven in his way; but all at once he felt that this would not do, andthat tonight he was a person obliged to perform some sort of awful ritewhich everyone expected of him, and that he was therefore bound toaccept their services. He took the glove in silence from the aide-de-camp, and sat down in the lady's chair, placing his huge handssymmetrically on his knees in the naive attitude of an Egyptian statue,and decided in his own mind that all was as it should be, and that inorder not to lose his head and do foolish things he must not act on hisown ideas tonight, but must yield himself up entirely to the will ofthose who were guiding him.Not two minutes had passed before Prince Vasili with head erectmajestically entered the room. He was wearing his long coat with threestars on his breast. He seemed to have grown thinner since the morning;his eyes seemed larger than usual when he glanced round and noticedPierre. He went up to him, took his hand (a thing he never used to do),and drew it downwards as if wishing to ascertain whether it was firmlyfixed on."Courage, courage, my friend! He has asked to see you. That is well!"and he turned to go.But Pierre thought it necessary to ask: "How is..." and hesitated, notknowing whether it would be proper to call the dying man "the count,"yet ashamed to call him "father.""He had another stroke about half an hour ago. Courage, my friend..."Pierre's mind was in such a confused state that the word "stroke"suggested to him a blow from something. He looked at Prince Vasili inperplexity, and only later grasped that a stroke was an attack ofillness. Prince Vasili said something to Lorrain in passing and wentthrough the door on tiptoe. He could not walk well on tiptoe and hiswhole body jerked at each step. The eldest princess followed him, andthe priests and deacons and some servants also went in at the door.Through that door was heard a noise of things being moved about, and atlast Anna Mikhaylovna, still with the same expression, pale but resolutein the discharge of duty, ran out and touching Pierre lightly on the armsaid:"The divine mercy is inexhaustible! Unction is about to be administered.Come."Pierre went in at the door, stepping on the soft carpet, and noticedthat the strange lady, the aide-de-camp, and some of the servants, allfollowed him in, as if there were now no further need for permission toenter that room.CHAPTER XXIIIPierre well knew this large room divided by columns and an arch, itswalls hung round with Persian carpets. The part of the room behind thecolumns, with a high silk-curtained mahogany bedstead on one side and onthe other an immense case containing icons, was brightly illuminatedwith red light like a Russian church during evening service. Under thegleaming icons stood a long invalid chair, and in that chair on snowy-white smooth pillows, evidently freshly changed, Pierre saw--covered tothe waist by a bright green quilt--the familiar, majestic figure of hisfather, Count Bezukhov, with that gray mane of hair above his broadforehead which reminded one of a lion, and the deep characteristicallynoble wrinkles of his handsome, ruddy face. He lay just under the icons;his large thick hands outside the quilt. Into the right hand, which waslying palm downwards, a wax taper had been thrust between forefinger andthumb, and an old servant, bending over from behind the chair, held itin position. By the chair stood the priests, their long hair fallingover their magnificent glittering vestments, with lighted tapers intheir hands, slowly and solemnly conducting the service. A little behindthem stood the two younger princesses holding handkerchiefs to theireyes, and just in front of them their eldest sister, Catiche, with avicious and determined look steadily fixed on the icons, as thoughdeclaring to all that she could not answer for herself should she glanceround. Anna Mikhaylovna, with a meek, sorrowful, and all-forgivingexpression on her face, stood by the door near the strange lady. PrinceVasili in front of the door, near the invalid chair, a wax taper in hisleft hand, was leaning his left arm on the carved back of a velvet chairhe had turned round for the purpose, and was crossing himself with hisright hand, turning his eyes upward each time he touched his forehead.His face wore a calm look of piety and resignation to the will of God."If you do not understand these sentiments," he seemed to be saying, "somuch the worse for you!"Behind him stood the aide-de-camp, the doctors, and the menservants; themen and women had separated as in church. All were silently crossingthemselves, and the reading of the church service, the subdued chantingof deep bass voices, and in the intervals sighs and the shuffling offeet were the only sounds that could be heard. Anna Mikhaylovna, with anair of importance that showed that she felt she quite knew what she wasabout, went across the room to where Pierre was standing and gave him ataper. He lit it and, distracted by observing those around him, begancrossing himself with the hand that held the taper.Sophie, the rosy, laughter-loving, youngest princess with the mole,watched him. She smiled, hid her face in her handkerchief, and remainedwith it hidden for awhile; then looking up and seeing Pierre she againbegan to laugh. She evidently felt unable to look at him withoutlaughing, but could not resist looking at him: so to be out oftemptation she slipped quietly behind one of the columns. In the midstof the service the voices of the priests suddenly ceased, they whisperedto one another, and the old servant who was holding the count's hand gotup and said something to the ladies. Anna Mikhaylovna stepped forwardand, stooping over the dying man, beckoned to Lorrain from behind herback. The French doctor held no taper; he was leaning against one of thecolumns in a respectful attitude implying that he, a foreigner, in spiteof all differences of faith, understood the full importance of the ritenow being performed and even approved of it. He now approached the sickman with the noiseless step of one in full vigor of life, with hisdelicate white fingers raised from the green quilt the hand that wasfree, and turning sideways felt the pulse and reflected a moment. Thesick man was given something to drink, there was a stir around him, thenthe people resumed their places and the service continued. During thisinterval Pierre noticed that Prince Vasili left the chair on which hehad been leaning, and--with an air which intimated that he knew what hewas about and if others did not understand him it was so much the worsefor them--did not go up to the dying man, but passed by him, joined theeldest princess, and moved with her to the side of the room where stoodthe high bedstead with its silken hangings. On leaving the bed bothPrince Vasili and the princess passed out by a back door, but returnedto their places one after the other before the service was concluded.Pierre paid no more attention to this occurrence than to the rest ofwhat went on, having made up his mind once for all that what he sawhappening around him that evening was in some way essential.The chanting of the service ceased, and the voice of the priest washeard respectfully congratulating the dying man on having received thesacrament. The dying man lay as lifeless and immovable as before. Aroundhim everyone began to stir: steps were audible and whispers, among whichAnna Mikhaylovna's was the most distinct.Pierre heard her say:"Certainly he must be moved onto the bed; here it will be impossible..."The sick man was so surrounded by doctors, princesses, and servants thatPierre could no longer see the reddish-yellow face with its gray mane--which, though he saw other faces as well, he had not lost sight of for asingle moment during the whole service. He judged by the cautiousmovements of those who crowded round the invalid chair that they hadlifted the dying man and were moving him."Catch hold of my arm or you'll drop him!" he heard one of the servantssay in a frightened whisper. "Catch hold from underneath. Here!"exclaimed different voices; and the heavy breathing of the bearers andthe shuffling of their feet grew more hurried, as if the weight theywere carrying were too much for them.As the bearers, among whom was Anna Mikhaylovna, passed the young man hecaught a momentary glimpse between their heads and backs of the dyingman's high, stout, uncovered chest and powerful shoulders, raised bythose who were holding him under the armpits, and of his gray, curly,leonine head. This head, with its remarkably broad brow and cheekbones,its handsome, sensual mouth, and its cold, majestic expression, was notdisfigured by the approach of death. It was the same as Pierreremembered it three months before, when the count had sent him toPetersburg. But now this head was swaying helplessly with the unevenmovements of the bearers, and the cold listless gaze fixed itself uponnothing.After a few minutes' bustle beside the high bedstead, those who hadcarried the sick man dispersed. Anna Mikhaylovna touched Pierre's handand said, "Come." Pierre went with her to the bed on which the sick manhad been laid in a stately pose in keeping with the ceremony justcompleted. He lay with his head propped high on the pillows. His handswere symmetrically placed on the green silk quilt, the palms downward.When Pierre came up the count was gazing straight at him, but with alook the significance of which could not be understood by mortal man.Either this look meant nothing but that as long as one has eyes theymust look somewhere, or it meant too much. Pierre hesitated, not knowingwhat to do, and glanced inquiringly at his guide. Anna Mikhaylovna madea hurried sign with her eyes, glancing at the sick man's hand and movingher lips as if to send it a kiss. Pierre, carefully stretching his neckso as not to touch the quilt, followed her suggestion and pressed hislips to the large boned, fleshy hand. Neither the hand nor a singlemuscle of the count's face stirred. Once more Pierre lookedquestioningly at Anna Mikhaylovna to see what he was to do next. AnnaMikhaylovna with her eyes indicated a chair that stood beside the bed.Pierre obediently sat down, his eyes asking if he were doing right. AnnaMikhaylovna nodded approvingly. Again Pierre fell into the naivelysymmetrical pose of an Egyptian statue, evidently distressed that hisstout and clumsy body took up so much room and doing his utmost to lookas small as possible. He looked at the count, who still gazed at thespot where Pierre's face had been before he sat down. Anna Mikhaylovnaindicated by her attitude her consciousness of the pathetic importanceof these last moments of meeting between the father and son. This lastedabout two minutes, which to Pierre seemed an hour. Suddenly the broadmuscles and lines of the count's face began to twitch. The twitchingincreased, the handsome mouth was drawn to one side (only now did Pierrerealize how near death his father was), and from that distorted mouthissued an indistinct, hoarse sound. Anna Mikhaylovna looked attentivelyat the sick man's eyes, trying to guess what he wanted; she pointedfirst to Pierre, then to some drink, then named Prince Vasili in aninquiring whisper, then pointed to the quilt. The eyes and face of thesick man showed impatience. He made an effort to look at the servant whostood constantly at the head of the bed."Wants to turn on the other side," whispered the servant, and got up toturn the count's heavy body toward the wall.Pierre rose to help him.While the count was being turned over, one of his arms fell backhelplessly and he made a fruitless effort to pull it forward. Whether henoticed the look of terror with which Pierre regarded that lifeless arm,or whether some other thought flitted across his dying brain, at anyrate he glanced at the refractory arm, at Pierre's terror-stricken face,and again at the arm, and on his face a feeble, piteous smile appeared,quite out of keeping with his features, that seemed to deride his ownhelplessness. At sight of this smile Pierre felt an unexpected quiveringin his breast and a tickling in his nose, and tears dimmed his eyes. Thesick man was turned on to his side with his face to the wall. He sighed."He is dozing," said Anna Mikhaylovna, observing that one of theprincesses was coming to take her turn at watching. "Let us go."Pierre went out.CHAPTER XXIVThere was now no one in the reception room except Prince Vasili and theeldest princess, who were sitting under the portrait of Catherine theGreat and talking eagerly. As soon as they saw Pierre and his companionthey became silent, and Pierre thought he saw the princess hidesomething as she whispered:"I can't bear the sight of that woman.""Catiche has had tea served in the small drawing room," said PrinceVasili to Anna Mikhaylovna. "Go and take something, my poor AnnaMikhaylovna, or you will not hold out."To Pierre he said nothing, merely giving his arm a sympathetic squeezebelow the shoulder. Pierre went with Anna Mikhaylovna into the smalldrawing room."There is nothing so refreshing after a sleepless night as a cup of thisdelicious Russian tea," Lorrain was saying with an air of restrainedanimation as he stood sipping tea from a delicate Chinese handleless cupbefore a table on which tea and a cold supper were laid in the smallcircular room. Around the table all who were at Count Bezukhov's housethat night had gathered to fortify themselves. Pierre well rememberedthis small circular drawing room with its mirrors and little tables.During balls given at the house Pierre, who did not know how to dance,had liked sitting in this room to watch the ladies who, as they passedthrough in their ball dresses with diamonds and pearls on their bareshoulders, looked at themselves in the brilliantly lighted mirrors whichrepeated their reflections several times. Now this same room was dimlylighted by two candles. On one small table tea things and supper dishesstood in disorder, and in the middle of the night a motley throng ofpeople sat there, not merrymaking, but somberly whispering, andbetraying by every word and movement that they none of them forgot whatwas happening and what was about to happen in the bedroom. Pierre didnot eat anything though he would very much have liked to. He lookedinquiringly at his monitress and saw that she was again going on tiptoeto the reception room where they had left Prince Vasili and the eldestprincess. Pierre concluded that this also was essential, and after ashort interval followed her. Anna Mikhaylovna was standing beside theprincess, and they were both speaking in excited whispers."Permit me, Princess, to know what is necessary and what is notnecessary," said the younger of the two speakers, evidently in the samestate of excitement as when she had slammed the door of her room."But, my dear princess," answered Anna Mikhaylovna blandly butimpressively, blocking the way to the bedroom and preventing the otherfrom passing, "won't this be too much for poor Uncle at a moment when heneeds repose? Worldly conversation at a moment when his soul is alreadyprepared..."Prince Vasili was seated in an easy chair in his familiar attitude, withone leg crossed high above the other. His cheeks, which were so flabbythat they looked heavier below, were twitching violently; but he worethe air of a man little concerned in what the two ladies were saying."Come, my dear Anna Mikhaylovna, let Catiche do as she pleases. You knowhow fond the count is of her.""I don't even know what is in this paper," said the younger of the twoladies, addressing Prince Vasili and pointing to an inlaid portfolio sheheld in her hand. "All I know is that his real will is in his writingtable, and this is a paper he has forgotten...."She tried to pass Anna Mikhaylovna, but the latter sprang so as to barher path."I know, my dear, kind princess," said Anna Mikhaylovna, seizing theportfolio so firmly that it was plain she would not let go easily. "Dearprincess, I beg and implore you, have some pity on him! Je vous enconjure..."The princess did not reply. Their efforts in the struggle for theportfolio were the only sounds audible, but it was evident that if theprincess did speak, her words would not be flattering to AnnaMikhaylovna. Though the latter held on tenaciously, her voice lost noneof its honeyed firmness and softness."Pierre, my dear, come here. I think he will not be out of place in afamily consultation; is it not so, Prince?""Why don't you speak, cousin?" suddenly shrieked the princess so loudthat those in the drawing room heard her and were startled. "Why do youremain silent when heaven knows who permits herself to interfere, makinga scene on the very threshold of a dying man's room? Intriguer!" shehissed viciously, and tugged with all her might at the portfolio.But Anna Mikhaylovna went forward a step or two to keep her hold on theportfolio, and changed her grip.Prince Vasili rose. "Oh!" said he with reproach and surprise, "this isabsurd! Come, let go I tell you."The princess let go."And you too!"But Anna Mikhaylovna did not obey him."Let go, I tell you! I will take the responsibility. I myself will goand ask him, I!... does that satisfy you?""But, Prince," said Anna Mikhaylovna, "after such a solemn sacrament,allow him a moment's peace! Here, Pierre, tell them your opinion," saidshe, turning to the young man who, having come quite close, was gazingwith astonishment at the angry face of the princess which had lost alldignity, and at the twitching cheeks of Prince Vasili."Remember that you will answer for the consequences," said Prince Vasiliseverely. "You don't know what you are doing.""Vile woman!" shouted the princess, darting unexpectedly at AnnaMikhaylovna and snatching the portfolio from her.Prince Vasili bent his head and spread out his hands.At this moment that terrible door, which Pierre had watched so long andwhich had always opened so quietly, burst noisily open and bangedagainst the wall, and the second of the three sisters rushed outwringing her hands."What are you doing!" she cried vehemently. "He is dying and you leaveme alone with him!"Her sister dropped the portfolio. Anna Mikhaylovna, stooping, quicklycaught up the object of contention and ran into the bedroom. The eldestprincess and Prince Vasili, recovering themselves, followed her. A fewminutes later the eldest sister came out with a pale hard face, againbiting her underlip. At sight of Pierre her expression showed anirrepressible hatred."Yes, now you may be glad!" said she; "this is what you have beenwaiting for." And bursting into tears she hid her face in herhandkerchief and rushed from the room.Prince Vasili came next. He staggered to the sofa on which Pierre wassitting and dropped onto it, covering his face with his hand. Pierrenoticed that he was pale and that his jaw quivered and shook as if in anague."Ah, my friend!" said he, taking Pierre by the elbow; and there was inhis voice a sincerity and weakness Pierre had never observed in itbefore. "How often we sin, how much we deceive, and all for what? I amnear sixty, dear friend... I too... All will end in death, all! Death isawful..." and he burst into tears.Anna Mikhaylovna came out last. She approached Pierre with slow, quietsteps."Pierre!" she said.Pierre gave her an inquiring look. She kissed the young man on hisforehead, wetting him with her tears. Then after a pause she said:"He is no more...."Pierre looked at her over his spectacles."Come, I will go with you. Try to weep, nothing gives such relief astears."She led him into the dark drawing room and Pierre was glad no one couldsee his face. Anna Mikhaylovna left him, and when she returned he wasfast asleep with his head on his arm.In the morning Anna Mikhaylovna said to Pierre:"Yes, my dear, this is a great loss for us all, not to speak of you. ButGod will support you: you are young, and are now, I hope, in command ofan immense fortune. The will has not yet been opened. I know you wellenough to be sure that this will not turn your head, but it imposesduties on you, and you must be a man."Pierre was silent."Perhaps later on I may tell you, my dear boy, that if I had not beenthere, God only knows what would have happened! You know, Uncle promisedme only the day before yesterday not to forget Boris. But he had notime. I hope, my dear friend, you will carry out your father's wish?"Pierre understood nothing of all this and coloring shyly looked insilence at Princess Anna Mikhaylovna. After her talk with Pierre, AnnaMikhaylovna returned to the Rostovs' and went to bed. On waking in themorning she told the Rostovs and all her acquaintances the details ofCount Bezukhov's death. She said the count had died as she would herselfwish to die, that his end was not only touching but edifying. As to thelast meeting between father and son, it was so touching that she couldnot think of it without tears, and did not know which had behaved betterduring those awful moments--the father who so remembered everything andeverybody at last and had spoken such pathetic words to the son, orPierre, whom it had been pitiful to see, so stricken was he with grief,though he tried hard to hide it in order not to sadden his dying father."It is painful, but it does one good. It uplifts the soul to see suchmen as the old count and his worthy son," said she. Of the behavior ofthe eldest princess and Prince Vasili she spoke disapprovingly, but inwhispers and as a great secret.CHAPTER XXVAt Bald Hills, Prince Nicholas Andreevich Bolkonski's estate, thearrival of young Prince Andrew and his wife was daily expected, but thisexpectation did not upset the regular routine of life in the oldprince's household. General in Chief Prince Nicholas Andreevich(nicknamed in society, "the King of Prussia") ever since the EmperorPaul had exiled him to his country estate had lived there continuouslywith his daughter, Princess Mary, and her companion, MademoiselleBourienne. Though in the new reign he was free to return to thecapitals, he still continued to live in the country, remarking thatanyone who wanted to see him could come the hundred miles from Moscow toBald Hills, while he himself needed no one and nothing. He used to saythat there are only two sources of human vice--idleness andsuperstition, and only two virtues--activity and intelligence. Hehimself undertook his daughter's education, and to develop these twocardinal virtues in her gave her lessons in algebra and geometry tillshe was twenty, and arranged her life so that her whole time wasoccupied. He was himself always occupied: writing his memoirs, solvingproblems in higher mathematics, turning snuffboxes on a lathe, workingin the garden, or superintending the building that was always going onat his estate. As regularity is a prime condition facilitating activity,regularity in his household was carried to the highest point ofexactitude. He always came to table under precisely the same conditions,and not only at the same hour but at the same minute. With those abouthim, from his daughter to his serfs, the prince was sharp and invariablyexacting, so that without being a hardhearted man he inspired such fearand respect as few hardhearted men would have aroused. Although he wasin retirement and had now no influence in political affairs, every highofficial appointed to the province in which the prince's estate layconsidered it his duty to visit him and waited in the lofty antechamberjust as the architect, gardener, or Princess Mary did, till the princeappeared punctually to the appointed hour. Everyone sitting in thisantechamber experienced the same feeling of respect and even fear whenthe enormously high study door opened and showed the figure of a rathersmall old man, with powdered wig, small withered hands, and bushy grayeyebrows which, when he frowned, sometimes hid the gleam of his shrewd,youthfully glittering eyes.On the morning of the day that the young couple were to arrive, PrincessMary entered the antechamber as usual at the time appointed for themorning greeting, crossing herself with trepidation and repeating asilent prayer. Every morning she came in like that, and every morningprayed that the daily interview might pass off well.An old powdered manservant who was sitting in the antechamber rosequietly and said in a whisper: "Please walk in."Through the door came the regular hum of a lathe. The princess timidlyopened the door which moved noiselessly and easily. She paused at theentrance. The prince was working at the lathe and after glancing roundcontinued his work.The enormous study was full of things evidently in constant use. Thelarge table covered with books and plans, the tall glass-frontedbookcases with keys in the locks, the high desk for writing whilestanding up, on which lay an open exercise book, and the lathe withtools laid ready to hand and shavings scattered around--all indicatedcontinuous, varied, and orderly activity. The motion of the small footshod in a Tartar boot embroidered with silver, and the firm pressure ofthe lean sinewy hand, showed that the prince still possessed thetenacious endurance and vigor of hardy old age. After a few more turnsof the lathe he removed his foot from the pedal, wiped his chisel,dropped it into a leather pouch attached to the lathe, and, approachingthe table, summoned his daughter. He never gave his children a blessing,so he simply held out his bristly cheek (as yet unshaven) and, regardingher tenderly and attentively, said severely:"Quite well? All right then, sit down." He took the exercise bookcontaining lessons in geometry written by himself and drew up a chairwith his foot."For tomorrow!" said he, quickly finding the page and making a scratchfrom one paragraph to another with his hard nail.The princess bent over the exercise book on the table."Wait a bit, here's a letter for you," said the old man suddenly, takinga letter addressed in a woman's hand from a bag hanging above the table,onto which he threw it.At the sight of the letter red patches showed themselves on theprincess' face. She took it quickly and bent her head over it."From Heloise?" asked the prince with a cold smile that showed his stillsound, yellowish teeth."Yes, it's from Julie," replied the princess with a timid glance and atimid smile."I'll let two more letters pass, but the third I'll read," said theprince sternly; "I'm afraid you write much nonsense. I'll read thethird!""Read this if you like, Father," said the princess, blushing still moreand holding out the letter."The third, I said the third!" cried the prince abruptly, pushing theletter away, and leaning his elbows on the table he drew toward him theexercise book containing geometrical figures."Well, madam," he began, stooping over the book close to his daughterand placing an arm on the back of the chair on which she sat, so thatshe felt herself surrounded on all sides by the acrid scent of old ageand tobacco, which she had known so long. "Now, madam, these trianglesare equal; please note that the angle ABC..."The princess looked in a scared way at her father's eyes glitteringclose to her; the red patches on her face came and went, and it wasplain that she understood nothing and was so frightened that her fearwould prevent her understanding any of her father's furtherexplanations, however clear they might be. Whether it was the teacher'sfault or the pupil's, this same thing happened every day: the princess'eyes grew dim, she could not see and could not hear anything, but wasonly conscious of her stern father's withered face close to her, of hisbreath and the smell of him, and could think only of how to get awayquickly to her own room to make out the problem in peace. The old manwas beside himself: moved the chair on which he was sitting noisilybackward and forward, made efforts to control himself and not becomevehement, but almost always did become vehement, scolded, and sometimesflung the exercise book away.The princess gave a wrong answer."Well now, isn't she a fool!" shouted the prince, pushing the book asideand turning sharply away; but rising immediately, he paced up and down,lightly touched his daughter's hair and sat down again.He drew up his chair, and continued to explain."This won't do, Princess; it won't do," said he, when Princess Mary,having taken and closed the exercise book with the next day's lesson,was about to leave: "Mathematics are most important, madam! I don't wantto have you like our silly ladies. Get used to it and you'll like it,"and he patted her cheek. "It will drive all the nonsense out of yourhead."She turned to go, but he stopped her with a gesture and took an uncutbook from the high desk."Here is some sort of Key to the Mysteries that your Heloise has sentyou. Religious! I don't interfere with anyone's belief... I have lookedat it. Take it. Well, now go. Go."He patted her on the shoulder and himself closed the door after her.Princess Mary went back to her room with the sad, scared expression thatrarely left her and which made her plain, sickly face yet plainer. Shesat down at her writing table, on which stood miniature portraits andwhich was littered with books and papers. The princess was as untidy asher father was tidy. She put down the geometry book and eagerly brokethe seal of her letter. It was from her most intimate friend fromchildhood; that same Julie Karagina who had been at the Rostovs' name-day party.Julie wrote in French:Dear and precious Friend, How terrible and frightful a thing isseparation! Though I tell myself that half my life and half my happinessare wrapped up in you, and that in spite of the distance separating usour hearts are united by indissoluble bonds, my heart rebels againstfate and in spite of the pleasures and distractions around me I cannotovercome a certain secret sorrow that has been in my heart ever since weparted. Why are we not together as we were last summer, in your bigstudy, on the blue sofa, the confidential sofa? Why cannot I now, asthree months ago, draw fresh moral strength from your look, so gentle,calm, and penetrating, a look I loved so well and seem to see before meas I write?Having read thus far, Princess Mary sighed and glanced into the mirrorwhich stood on her right. It reflected a weak, ungraceful figure andthin face. Her eyes, always sad, now looked with particular hopelessnessat her reflection in the glass. "She flatters me," thought the princess,turning away and continuing to read. But Julie did not flatter herfriend, the princess' eyes--large, deep and luminous (it seemed as if attimes there radiated from them shafts of warm light)--were so beautifulthat very often in spite of the plainness of her face they gave her anattraction more powerful than that of beauty. But the princess never sawthe beautiful expression of her own eyes--the look they had when she wasnot thinking of herself. As with everyone, her face assumed a forcedunnatural expression as soon as she looked in a glass. She went onreading:All Moscow talks of nothing but war. One of my two brothers is alreadyabroad, the other is with the Guards, who are starting on their march tothe frontier. Our dear Emperor has left Petersburg and it is thoughtintends to expose his precious person to the chances of war. God grantthat the Corsican monster who is destroying the peace of Europe may beoverthrown by the angel whom it has pleased the Almighty, in Hisgoodness, to give us as sovereign! To say nothing of my brothers, thiswar has deprived me of one of the associations nearest my heart. I meanyoung Nicholas Rostov, who with his enthusiasm could not bear to remaininactive and has left the university to join the army. I will confess toyou, dear Mary, that in spite of his extreme youth his departure for thearmy was a great grief to me. This young man, of whom I spoke to youlast summer, is so noble-minded and full of that real youthfulness whichone seldom finds nowadays among our old men of twenty and, particularly,he is so frank and has so much heart. He is so pure and poetic that myrelations with him, transient as they were, have been one of thesweetest comforts to my poor heart, which has already suffered so much.Someday I will tell you about our parting and all that was said then.That is still too fresh. Ah, dear friend, you are happy not to knowthese poignant joys and sorrows. You are fortunate, for the latter aregenerally the stronger! I know very well that Count Nicholas is tooyoung ever to be more to me than a friend, but this sweet friendship,this poetic and pure intimacy, were what my heart needed. But enough ofthis! The chief news, about which all Moscow gossips, is the death ofold Count Bezukhov, and his inheritance. Fancy! The three princesseshave received very little, Prince Vasili nothing, and it is MonsieurPierre who has inherited all the property and has besides beenrecognized as legitimate; so that he is now Count Bezukhov and possessorof the finest fortune in Russia. It is rumored that Prince Vasili playeda very despicable part in this affair and that he returned to Petersburgquite crestfallen.I confess I understand very little about all these matters of wills andinheritance; but I do know that since this young man, whom we all usedto know as plain Monsieur Pierre, has become Count Bezukhov and theowner of one of the largest fortunes in Russia, I am much amused towatch the change in the tone and manners of the mammas burdened bymarriageable daughters, and of the young ladies themselves, toward him,though, between you and me, he always seemed to me a poor sort offellow. As for the past two years people have amused themselves byfinding husbands for me (most of whom I don't even know), thematchmaking chronicles of Moscow now speak of me as the future CountessBezukhova. But you will understand that I have no desire for the post. Apropos of marriages: do you know that a while ago that universal auntieAnna Mikhaylovna told me, under the seal of strict secrecy, of a plan ofmarriage for you. It is neither more nor less than with Prince Vasili'sson Anatole, whom they wish to reform by marrying him to someone richand distinguee, and it is on you that his relations' choice has fallen.I don't know what you will think of it, but I consider it my duty to letyou know of it. He is said to be very handsome and a terriblescapegrace. That is all I have been able to find out about him.But enough of gossip. I am at the end of my second sheet of paper, andMamma has sent for me to go and dine at the Apraksins'. Read themystical book I am sending you; it has an enormous success here. Thoughthere are things in it difficult for the feeble human mind to grasp, itis an admirable book which calms and elevates the soul. Adieu! Give myrespects to monsieur your father and my compliments to MademoiselleBourienne. I embrace you as I love you.JULIEP.S. Let me have news of your brother and his charming little wife.The princess pondered awhile with a thoughtful smile and her luminouseyes lit up so that her face was entirely transformed. Then she suddenlyrose and with her heavy tread went up to the table. She took a sheet ofpaper and her hand moved rapidly over it. This is the reply she wrote,also in French:Dear and precious Friend, Your letter of the 13th has given me greatdelight. So you still love me, my romantic Julie? Separation, of whichyou say so much that is bad, does not seem to have had its usual effecton you. You complain of our separation. What then should I say, if Idared complain, I who am deprived of all who are dear to me? Ah, if wehad not religion to console us life would be very sad. Why do yousuppose that I should look severely on your affection for that youngman? On such matters I am only severe with myself. I understand suchfeelings in others, and if never having felt them I cannot approve ofthem, neither do I condemn them. Only it seems to me that Christianlove, love of one's neighbor, love of one's enemy, is worthier, sweeter,and better than the feelings which the beautiful eyes of a young man caninspire in a romantic and loving young girl like yourself.The news of Count Bezukhov's death reached us before your letter and myfather was much affected by it. He says the count was the lastrepresentative but one of the great century, and that it is his own turnnow, but that he will do all he can to let his turn come as late aspossible. God preserve us from that terrible misfortune!I cannot agree with you about Pierre, whom I knew as a child. He alwaysseemed to me to have an excellent heart, and that is the quality I valuemost in people. As to his inheritance and the part played by PrinceVasili, it is very sad for both. Ah, my dear friend, our divineSaviour's words, that it is easier for a camel to go through the eye ofa needle than for a rich man to enter the Kingdom of God, are terriblytrue. I pity Prince Vasili but am still more sorry for Pierre. So young,and burdened with such riches--to what temptations he will be exposed!If I were asked what I desire most on earth, it would be to be poorerthan the poorest beggar. A thousand thanks, dear friend, for the volumeyou have sent me and which has such success in Moscow. Yet since youtell me that among some good things it contains others which our weakhuman understanding cannot grasp, it seems to me rather useless to spendtime in reading what is unintelligible and can therefore bear no fruit.I never could understand the fondness some people have for confusingtheir minds by dwelling on mystical books that merely awaken theirdoubts and excite their imagination, giving them a bent for exaggerationquite contrary to Christian simplicity. Let us rather read the Epistlesand Gospels. Let us not seek to penetrate what mysteries they contain;for how can we, miserable sinners that we are, know the terrible andholy secrets of Providence while we remain in this flesh which forms animpenetrable veil between us and the Eternal? Let us rather confineourselves to studying those sublime rules which our divine Saviour hasleft for our guidance here below. Let us try to conform to them andfollow them, and let us be persuaded that the less we let our feeblehuman minds roam, the better we shall please God, who rejects allknowledge that does not come from Him; and the less we seek to fathomwhat He has been pleased to conceal from us, the sooner will Hevouchsafe its revelation to us through His divine Spirit.My father has not spoken to me of a suitor, but has only told me that hehas received a letter and is expecting a visit from Prince Vasili. Inregard to this project of marriage for me, I will tell you, dear sweetfriend, that I look on marriage as a divine institution to which we mustconform. However painful it may be to me, should the Almighty lay theduties of wife and mother upon me I shall try to perform them asfaithfully as I can, without disquieting myself by examining my feelingstoward him whom He may give me for husband.I have had a letter from my brother, who announces his speedy arrival atBald Hills with his wife. This pleasure will be but a brief one,however, for he will leave us again to take part in this unhappy warinto which we have been drawn, God knows how or why. Not only where youare--at the heart of affairs and of the world--is the talk all of war,even here amid fieldwork and the calm of nature--which townsfolkconsider characteristic of the country--rumors of war are heard andpainfully felt. My father talks of nothing but marches andcountermarches, things of which I understand nothing; and the day beforeyesterday during my daily walk through the village I witnessed aheartrending scene.... It was a convoy of conscripts enrolled from ourpeople and starting to join the army. You should have seen the state ofthe mothers, wives, and children of the men who were going and shouldhave heard the sobs. It seems as though mankind has forgotten the lawsof its divine Saviour, Who preached love and forgiveness of injuries--and that men attribute the greatest merit to skill in killing oneanother.Adieu, dear and kind friend; may our divine Saviour and His most HolyMother keep you in their holy and all-powerful care!MARY"Ah, you are sending off a letter, Princess? I have already dispatchedmine. I have written to my poor mother," said the smiling MademoiselleBourienne rapidly, in her pleasant mellow tones and with guttural r's.She brought into Princess Mary's strenuous, mournful, and gloomy world aquite different atmosphere, careless, lighthearted, and self-satisfied."Princess, I must warn you," she added, lowering her voice and evidentlylistening to herself with pleasure, and speaking with exaggeratedgrasseyement, "the prince has been scolding Michael Ivanovich. He is ina very bad humor, very morose. Be prepared.""Ah, dear friend," replied Princess Mary, "I have asked you never towarn me of the humor my father is in. I do not allow myself to judge himand would not have others do so."The princess glanced at her watch and, seeing that she was five minuteslate in starting her practice on the clavichord, went into the sittingroom with a look of alarm. Between twelve and two o'clock, as the daywas mapped out, the prince rested and the princess played theclavichord.CHAPTER XXVIThe gray-haired valet was sitting drowsily listening to the snoring ofthe prince, who was in his large study. From the far side of the housethrough the closed doors came the sound of difficult passages--twentytimes repeated--of a sonata by Dussek.Just then a closed carriage and another with a hood drove up to theporch. Prince Andrew got out of the carriage, helped his little wife toalight, and let her pass into the house before him. Old Tikhon, wearinga wig, put his head out of the door of the antechamber, reported in awhisper that the prince was sleeping, and hastily closed the door.Tikhon knew that neither the son's arrival nor any other unusual eventmust be allowed to disturb the appointed order of the day. Prince Andrewapparently knew this as well as Tikhon; he looked at his watch as if toascertain whether his father's habits had changed since he was at homelast, and, having assured himself that they had not, he turned to hiswife."He will get up in twenty minutes. Let us go across to Mary's room," hesaid.The little princess had grown stouter during this time, but her eyes andher short, downy, smiling lip lifted when she began to speak just asmerrily and prettily as ever."Why, this is a palace!" she said to her husband, looking around withthe expression with which people compliment their host at a ball. "Let'scome, quick, quick!" And with a glance round, she smiled at Tikhon, ather husband, and at the footman who accompanied them."Is that Mary practicing? Let's go quietly and take her by surprise."Prince Andrew followed her with a courteous but sad expression."You've grown older, Tikhon," he said in passing to the old man, whokissed his hand.Before they reached the room from which the sounds of the clavichordcame, the pretty, fair haired Frenchwoman, Mademoiselle Bourienne,rushed out apparently beside herself with delight."Ah! what joy for the princess!" exclaimed she: "At last! I must let herknow.""No, no, please not... You are Mademoiselle Bourienne," said the littleprincess, kissing her. "I know you already through my sister-in-law'sfriendship for you. She was not expecting us?"They went up to the door of the sitting room from which came the soundof the oft-repeated passage of the sonata. Prince Andrew stopped andmade a grimace, as if expecting something unpleasant.The little princess entered the room. The passage broke off in themiddle, a cry was heard, then Princess Mary's heavy tread and the soundof kissing. When Prince Andrew went in the two princesses, who had onlymet once before for a short time at his wedding, were in each other'sarms warmly pressing their lips to whatever place they happened totouch. Mademoiselle Bourienne stood near them pressing her hand to herheart, with a beatific smile and obviously equally ready to cry or tolaugh. Prince Andrew shrugged his shoulders and frowned, as lovers ofmusic do when they hear a false note. The two women let go of oneanother, and then, as if afraid of being too late, seized each other'shands, kissing them and pulling them away, and again began kissing eachother on the face, and then to Prince Andrew's surprise both began tocry and kissed again. Mademoiselle Bourienne also began to cry. PrinceAndrew evidently felt ill at ease, but to the two women it seemed quitenatural that they should cry, and apparently it never entered theirheads that it could have been otherwise at this meeting."Ah! my dear!... Ah! Mary!" they suddenly exclaimed, and then laughed."I dreamed last night..."--"You were not expecting us?..." "Ah! Mary,you have got thinner?..." "And you have grown stouter!...""I knew the princess at once," put in Mademoiselle Bourienne."And I had no idea!..." exclaimed Princess Mary. "Ah, Andrew, I did notsee you."Prince Andrew and his sister, hand in hand, kissed one another, and hetold her she was still the same crybaby as ever. Princess Mary hadturned toward her brother, and through her tears the loving, warm,gentle look of her large luminous eyes, very beautiful at that moment,rested on Prince Andrew's face.The little princess talked incessantly, her short, downy upper lipcontinually and rapidly touching her rosy nether lip when necessary anddrawing up again next moment when her face broke into a smile ofglittering teeth and sparkling eyes. She told of an accident they hadhad on the Spasski Hill which might have been serious for her in hercondition, and immediately after that informed them that she had leftall her clothes in Petersburg and that heaven knew what she would haveto dress in here; and that Andrew had quite changed, and that KittyOdyntsova had married an old man, and that there was a suitor for Mary,a real one, but that they would talk of that later. Princess Mary wasstill looking silently at her brother and her beautiful eyes were fullof love and sadness. It was plain that she was following a train ofthought independent of her sister-in-law's words. In the midst of adescription of the last Petersburg fete she addressed her brother:"So you are really going to the war, Andrew?" she said sighing.Lise sighed too."Yes, and even tomorrow," replied her brother."He is leaving me here, God knows why, when he might have hadpromotion..."Princess Mary did not listen to the end, but continuing her train ofthought turned to her sister-in-law with a tender glance at her figure."Is it certain?" she said.The face of the little princess changed. She sighed and said: "Yes,quite certain. Ah! it is very dreadful..."Her lip descended. She brought her face close to her sister-in-law's andunexpectedly again began to cry."She needs rest," said Prince Andrew with a frown. "Don't you, Lise?Take her to your room and I'll go to Father. How is he? Just the same?""Yes, just the same. Though I don't know what your opinion will be,"answered the princess joyfully."And are the hours the same? And the walks in the avenues? And thelathe?" asked Prince Andrew with a scarcely perceptible smile whichshowed that, in spite of all his love and respect for his father, he wasaware of his weaknesses."The hours are the same, and the lathe, and also the mathematics and mygeometry lessons," said Princess Mary gleefully, as if her lessons ingeometry were among the greatest delights of her life.When the twenty minutes had elapsed and the time had come for the oldprince to get up, Tikhon came to call the young prince to his father.The old man made a departure from his usual routine in honor of hisson's arrival: he gave orders to admit him to his apartments while hedressed for dinner. The old prince always dressed in old-fashionedstyle, wearing an antique coat and powdered hair; and when Prince Andrewentered his father's dressing room (not with the contemptuous look andmanner he wore in drawing rooms, but with the animated face with whichhe talked to Pierre), the old man was sitting on a large leather-coveredchair, wrapped in a powdering mantle, entrusting his head to Tikhon."Ah! here's the warrior! Wants to vanquish Buonaparte?" said the oldman, shaking his powdered head as much as the tail, which Tikhon washolding fast to plait, would allow."You at least must tackle him properly, or else if he goes on like thishe'll soon have us, too, for his subjects! How are you?" And he held outhis cheek.The old man was in a good temper after his nap before dinner. (He usedto say that a nap "after dinner was silver--before dinner, golden.") Hecast happy, sidelong glances at his son from under his thick, bushyeyebrows. Prince Andrew went up and kissed his father on the spotindicated to him. He made no reply on his father's favorite topic--making fun of the military men of the day, and more particularly ofBonaparte."Yes, Father, I have come to you and brought my wife who is pregnant,"said Prince Andrew, following every movement of his father's face withan eager and respectful look. "How is your health?""Only fools and rakes fall ill, my boy. You know me: I am busy frommorning till night and abstemious, so of course I am well.""Thank God," said his son smiling."God has nothing to do with it! Well, go on," he continued, returning tohis hobby; "tell me how the Germans have taught you to fight Bonaparteby this new science you call 'strategy.'"Prince Andrew smiled."Give me time to collect my wits, Father," said he, with a smile thatshowed that his father's foibles did not prevent his son from loving andhonoring him. "Why, I have not yet had time to settle down!""Nonsense, nonsense!" cried the old man, shaking his pigtail to seewhether it was firmly plaited, and grasping his by the hand. "The housefor your wife is ready. Princess Mary will take her there and show herover, and they'll talk nineteen to the dozen. That's their woman's way!I am glad to have her. Sit down and talk. About Mikhelson's army Iunderstand--Tolstoy's too... a simultaneous expedition.... But what'sthe southern army to do? Prussia is neutral... I know that. What aboutAustria?" said he, rising from his chair and pacing up and down the roomfollowed by Tikhon, who ran after him, handing him different articles ofclothing. "What of Sweden? How will they cross Pomerania?"Prince Andrew, seeing that his father insisted, began--at firstreluctantly, but gradually with more and more animation, and from habitchanging unconsciously from Russian to French as he went on--to explainthe plan of operation for the coming campaign. He explained how an army,ninety thousand strong, was to threaten Prussia so as to bring her outof her neutrality and draw her into the war; how part of that army wasto join some Swedish forces at Stralsund; how two hundred and twentythousand Austrians, with a hundred thousand Russians, were to operate inItaly and on the Rhine; how fifty thousand Russians and as many Englishwere to land at Naples, and how a total force of five hundred thousandmen was to attack the French from different sides. The old prince didnot evince the least interest during this explanation, but as if he werenot listening to it continued to dress while walking about, and threetimes unexpectedly interrupted. Once he stopped it by shouting: "Thewhite one, the white one!"This meant that Tikhon was not handing him the waistcoat he wanted.Another time he interrupted, saying:"And will she soon be confined?" and shaking his head reproachfullysaid: "That's bad! Go on, go on."The third interruption came when Prince Andrew was finishing hisdescription. The old man began to sing, in the cracked voice of old age:"Malbrook s'en va-t-en guerre. Dieu sait quand reviendra." ** "Marlborough is going to the wars; God knows when he'll return."His son only smiled."I don't say it's a plan I approve of," said the son; "I am only tellingyou what it is. Napoleon has also formed his plan by now, not worse thanthis one.""Well, you've told me nothing new," and the old man repeated,meditatively and rapidly:"Dieu sait quand reviendra. Go to the dining room."CHAPTER XXVIIAt the appointed hour the prince, powdered and shaven, entered thedining room where his daughter-in-law, Princess Mary, and MademoiselleBourienne were already awaiting him together with his architect, who bya strange caprice of his employer's was admitted to table though theposition of that insignificant individual was such as could certainlynot have caused him to expect that honor. The prince, who generally keptvery strictly to social distinctions and rarely admitted even importantgovernment officials to his table, had unexpectedly selected MichaelIvanovich (who always went into a corner to blow his nose on his checkedhandkerchief) to illustrate the theory that all men are equals, and hadmore than once impressed on his daughter that Michael Ivanovich was "nota whit worse than you or I." At dinner the prince usually spoke to thetaciturn Michael Ivanovich more often than to anyone else.In the dining room, which like all the rooms in the house wasexceedingly lofty, the members of the household and the footmen--onebehind each chair--stood waiting for the prince to enter. The headbutler, napkin on arm, was scanning the setting of the table, makingsigns to the footmen, and anxiously glancing from the clock to the doorby which the prince was to enter. Prince Andrew was looking at a largegilt frame, new to him, containing the genealogical tree of the PrincesBolkonski, opposite which hung another such frame with a badly paintedportrait (evidently by the hand of the artist belonging to the estate)of a ruling prince, in a crown--an alleged descendant of Rurik andancestor of the Bolkonskis. Prince Andrew, looking again at thatgenealogical tree, shook his head, laughing as a man laughs who looks ata portrait so characteristic of the original as to be amusing."How thoroughly like him that is!" he said to Princess Mary, who hadcome up to him.Princess Mary looked at her brother in surprise. She did not understandwhat he was laughing at. Everything her father did inspired her withreverence and was beyond question."Everyone has his Achilles' heel," continued Prince Andrew. "Fancy, withhis powerful mind, indulging in such nonsense!"Princess Mary could not understand the boldness of her brother'scriticism and was about to reply, when the expected footsteps were heardcoming from the study. The prince walked in quickly and jauntily as washis wont, as if intentionally contrasting the briskness of his mannerswith the strict formality of his house. At that moment the great clockstruck two and another with a shrill tone joined in from the drawingroom. The prince stood still; his lively glittering eyes from undertheir thick, bushy eyebrows sternly scanned all present and rested onthe little princess. She felt, as courtiers do when the Tsar enters, thesensation of fear and respect which the old man inspired in all aroundhim. He stroked her hair and then patted her awkwardly on the back ofher neck."I'm glad, glad, to see you," he said, looking attentively into hereyes, and then quickly went to his place and sat down. "Sit down, sitdown! Sit down, Michael Ianovich!"He indicated a place beside him to his daughter-in-law. A footman movedthe chair for her."Ho, ho!" said the old man, casting his eyes on her rounded figure."You've been in a hurry. That's bad!"He laughed in his usual dry, cold, unpleasant way, with his lips onlyand not with his eyes."You must walk, walk as much as possible, as much as possible," he said.The little princess did not, or did not wish to, hear his words. She wassilent and seemed confused. The prince asked her about her father, andshe began to smile and talk. He asked about mutual acquaintances, andshe became still more animated and chattered away giving him greetingsfrom various people and retelling the town gossip."Countess Apraksina, poor thing, has lost her husband and she has criedher eyes out," she said, growing more and more lively.As she became animated the prince looked at her more and more sternly,and suddenly, as if he had studied her sufficiently and had formed adefinite idea of her, he turned away and addressed Michael Ivanovich."Well, Michael Ivanovich, our Bonaparte will be having a bad time of it.Prince Andrew" (he always spoke thus of his son) "has been telling mewhat forces are being collected against him! While you and I neverthought much of him."Michael Ivanovich did not at all know when "you and I" had said suchthings about Bonaparte, but understanding that he was wanted as a peg onwhich to hang the prince's favorite topic, he looked inquiringly at theyoung prince, wondering what would follow."He is a great tactician!" said the prince to his son, pointing to thearchitect.And the conversation again turned on the war, on Bonaparte, and thegenerals and statesmen of the day. The old prince seemed convinced notonly that all the men of the day were mere babies who did not know the AB C of war or of politics, and that Bonaparte was an insignificantlittle Frenchy, successful only because there were no longer anyPotemkins or Suvorovs left to oppose him; but he was also convinced thatthere were no political difficulties in Europe and no real war, but onlya sort of puppet show at which the men of the day were playing,pretending to do something real. Prince Andrew gaily bore with hisfather's ridicule of the new men, and drew him on and listened to himwith evident pleasure."The past always seems good," said he, "but did not Suvorov himself fallinto a trap Moreau set him, and from which he did not know how toescape?""Who told you that? Who?" cried the prince. "Suvorov!" And he jerkedaway his plate, which Tikhon briskly caught. "Suvorov!... Consider,Prince Andrew. Two... Frederick and Suvorov; Moreau!... Moreau wouldhave been a prisoner if Suvorov had had a free hand; but he had theHofs-kriegs-wurst-schnapps-Rath on his hands. It would have puzzled thedevil himself! When you get there you'll find out what those Hofs-kriegs-wurst-Raths are! Suvorov couldn't manage them so what chance hasMichael Kutuzov? No, my dear boy," he continued, "you and your generalswon't get on against Buonaparte; you'll have to call in the French, sothat birds of a feather may fight together. The German, Pahlen, has beensent to New York in America, to fetch the Frenchman, Moreau," he said,alluding to the invitation made that year to Moreau to enter the Russianservice.... "Wonderful!... Were the Potemkins, Suvorovs, and OrlovsGermans? No, lad, either you fellows have all lost your wits, or I haveoutlived mine. May God help you, but we'll see what will happen.Buonaparte has become a great commander among them! Hm!...""I don't at all say that all the plans are good," said Prince Andrew, "Iam only surprised at your opinion of Bonaparte. You may laugh as much asyou like, but all the same Bonaparte is a great general!""Michael Ivanovich!" cried the old prince to the architect who, busywith his roast meat, hoped he had been forgotten: "Didn't I tell youBuonaparte was a great tactician? Here, he says the same thing.""To be sure, your excellency," replied the architect.The prince again laughed his frigid laugh."Buonaparte was born with a silver spoon in his mouth. He has gotsplendid soldiers. Besides he began by attacking Germans. And onlyidlers have failed to beat the Germans. Since the world began everybodyhas beaten the Germans. They beat no one--except one another. He madehis reputation fighting them."And the prince began explaining all the blunders which, according tohim, Bonaparte had made in his campaigns and even in politics. His sonmade no rejoinder, but it was evident that whatever arguments werepresented he was as little able as his father to change his opinion. Helistened, refraining from a reply, and involuntarily wondered how thisold man, living alone in the country for so many years, could know anddiscuss so minutely and acutely all the recent European military andpolitical events."You think I'm an old man and don't understand the present state ofaffairs?" concluded his father. "But it troubles me. I don't sleep atnight. Come now, where has this great commander of yours shown hisskill?" he concluded."That would take too long to tell," answered the son."Well, then go to your Buonaparte! Mademoiselle Bourienne, here'sanother admirer of that powder-monkey emperor of yours," he exclaimed inexcellent French."You know, Prince, I am not a Bonapartist!""Dieu sait quand reviendra..." hummed the prince out of tune and, with alaugh still more so, he quitted the table.The little princess during the whole discussion and the rest of thedinner sat silent, glancing with a frightened look now at her father-in-law and now at Princess Mary. When they left the table she took hersister-in-law's arm and drew her into another room."What a clever man your father is," said she; "perhaps that is why I amafraid of him.""Oh, he is so kind!" answered Princess Mary.CHAPTER XXVIIIPrince Andrew was to leave next evening. The old prince, not alteringhis routine, retired as usual after dinner. The little princess was inher sister-in-law's room. Prince Andrew in a traveling coat withoutepaulettes had been packing with his valet in the rooms assigned to him.After inspecting the carriage himself and seeing the trunks put in, heordered the horses to be harnessed. Only those things he always keptwith him remained in his room; a small box, a large canteen fitted withsilver plate, two Turkish pistols and a saber--a present from his fatherwho had brought it from the siege of Ochakov. All these travelingeffects of Prince Andrew's were in very good order: new, clean, and incloth covers carefully tied with tapes.When starting on a journey or changing their mode of life, men capableof reflection are generally in a serious frame of mind. At such momentsone reviews the past and plans for the future. Prince Andrew's facelooked very thoughtful and tender. With his hands behind him he pacedbriskly from corner to corner of the room, looking straight before himand thoughtfully shaking his head. Did he fear going to the war, or washe sad at leaving his wife?--perhaps both, but evidently he did not wishto be seen in that mood, for hearing footsteps in the passage hehurriedly unclasped his hands, stopped at a table as if tying the coverof the small box, and assumed his usual tranquil and impenetrableexpression. It was the heavy tread of Princess Mary that he heard."I hear you have given orders to harness," she cried, panting (she hadapparently been running), "and I did so wish to have another talk withyou alone! God knows how long we may again be parted. You are not angrywith me for coming? You have changed so, Andrusha," she added, as if toexplain such a question.She smiled as she uttered his pet name, "Andrusha." It was obviouslystrange to her to think that this stern handsome man should be Andrusha--the slender mischievous boy who had been her playfellow in childhood."And where is Lise?" he asked, answering her question only by a smile."She was so tired that she has fallen asleep on the sofa in my room. Oh,Andrew! What a treasure of a wife you have," said she, sitting down onthe sofa, facing her brother. "She is quite a child: such a dear, merrychild. I have grown so fond of her."Prince Andrew was silent, but the princess noticed the ironical andcontemptuous look that showed itself on his face."One must be indulgent to little weaknesses; who is free from them,Andrew? Don't forget that she has grown up and been educated in society,and so her position now is not a rosy one. We should enter intoeveryone's situation. Tout comprendre, c'est tout pardonner. * Thinkwhat it must be for her, poor thing, after what she has been used to, tobe parted from her husband and be left alone in the country, in hercondition! It's very hard."* To understand all is to forgive all.Prince Andrew smiled as he looked at his sister, as we smile at those wethink we thoroughly understand."You live in the country and don't think the life terrible," he replied."I... that's different. Why speak of me? I don't want any other life,and can't, for I know no other. But think, Andrew: for a young societywoman to be buried in the country during the best years of her life, allalone--for Papa is always busy, and I... well, you know what poorresources I have for entertaining a woman used to the best society.There is only Mademoiselle Bourienne....""I don't like your Mademoiselle Bourienne at all," said Prince Andrew."No? She is very nice and kind and, above all, she's much to be pitied.She has no one, no one. To tell the truth, I don't need her, and she'seven in my way. You know I always was a savage, and now am even more so.I like being alone.... Father likes her very much. She and MichaelIvanovich are the two people to whom he is always gentle and kind,because he has been a benefactor to them both. As Sterne says: 'We don'tlove people so much for the good they have done us, as for the good wehave done them.' Father took her when she was homeless after losing herown father. She is very good-natured, and my father likes her way ofreading. She reads to him in the evenings and reads splendidly.""To be quite frank, Mary, I expect Father's character sometimes makesthings trying for you, doesn't it?" Prince Andrew asked suddenly.Princess Mary was first surprised and then aghast at this question."For me? For me?... Trying for me!..." said she."He always was rather harsh; and now I should think he's getting verytrying," said Prince Andrew, apparently speaking lightly of their fatherin order to puzzle or test his sister."You are good in every way, Andrew, but you have a kind of intellectualpride," said the princess, following the train of her own thoughtsrather than the trend of the conversation--"and that's a great sin. Howcan one judge Father? But even if one might, what feeling exceptveneration could such a man as my father evoke? And I am so contentedand happy with him. I only wish you were all as happy as I am."Her brother shook his head incredulously."The only thing that is hard for me... I will tell you the truth,Andrew... is Father's way of treating religious subjects. I don'tunderstand how a man of his immense intellect can fail to see what is asclear as day, and can go so far astray. That is the only thing thatmakes me unhappy. But even in this I can see lately a shade ofimprovement. His satire has been less bitter of late, and there was amonk he received and had a long talk with.""Ah! my dear, I am afraid you and your monk are wasting your powder,"said Prince Andrew banteringly yet tenderly."Ah! mon ami, I only pray, and hope that God will hear me. Andrew..."she said timidly after a moment's silence, "I have a great favor to askof you.""What is it, dear?""No--promise that you will not refuse! It will give you no trouble andis nothing unworthy of you, but it will comfort me. Promise,Andrusha!..." said she, putting her hand in her reticule but not yettaking out what she was holding inside it, as if what she held were thesubject of her request and must not be shown before the request wasgranted.She looked timidly at her brother."Even if it were a great deal of trouble..." answered Prince Andrew, asif guessing what it was about."Think what you please! I know you are just like Father. Think as youplease, but do this for my sake! Please do! Father's father, ourgrandfather, wore it in all his wars." (She still did not take out whatshe was holding in her reticule.) "So you promise?""Of course. What is it?""Andrew, I bless you with this icon and you must promise me you willnever take it off. Do you promise?""If it does not weigh a hundredweight and won't break my neck... Toplease you..." said Prince Andrew. But immediately, noticing the painedexpression his joke had brought to his sister's face, he repented andadded: "I am glad; really, dear, I am very glad.""Against your will He will save and have mercy on you and bring you toHimself, for in Him alone is truth and peace," said she in a voicetrembling with emotion, solemnly holding up in both hands before herbrother a small, oval, antique, dark-faced icon of the Saviour in a goldsetting, on a finely wrought silver chain.She crossed herself, kissed the icon, and handed it to Andrew."Please, Andrew, for my sake!..."Rays of gentle light shone from her large, timid eyes. Those eyes lit upthe whole of her thin, sickly face and made it beautiful. Her brotherwould have taken the icon, but she stopped him. Andrew understood,crossed himself and kissed the icon. There was a look of tenderness, forhe was touched, but also a gleam of irony on his face."Thank you, my dear." She kissed him on the forehead and sat down againon the sofa. They were silent for a while."As I was saying to you, Andrew, be kind and generous as you always usedto be. Don't judge Lise harshly," she began. "She is so sweet, so good-natured, and her position now is a very hard one.""I do not think I have complained of my wife to you, Masha, or blamedher. Why do you say all this to me?"Red patches appeared on Princess Mary's face and she was silent as ifshe felt guilty."I have said nothing to you, but you have already been talked to. And Iam sorry for that," he went on.The patches grew deeper on her forehead, neck, and cheeks. She tried tosay something but could not. Her brother had guessed right: the littleprincess had been crying after dinner and had spoken of her forebodingsabout her confinement, and how she dreaded it, and had complained of herfate, her father-in-law, and her husband. After crying she had fallenasleep. Prince Andrew felt sorry for his sister."Know this, Masha: I can't reproach, have not reproached, and nevershall reproach my wife with anything, and I cannot reproach myself withanything in regard to her; and that always will be so in whatevercircumstances I may be placed. But if you want to know the truth... ifyou want to know whether I am happy? No! Is she happy? No! But why thisis so I don't know..."As he said this he rose, went to his sister, and, stooping, kissed herforehead. His fine eyes lit up with a thoughtful, kindly, andunaccustomed brightness, but he was looking not at his sister but overher head toward the darkness of the open doorway."Let us go to her, I must say good-by. Or--go and wake and I'll come ina moment. Petrushka!" he called to his valet: "Come here, take theseaway. Put this on the seat and this to the right."Princess Mary rose and moved to the door, then stopped and said:"Andrew, if you had faith you would have turned to God and asked Him togive you the love you do not feel, and your prayer would have beenanswered.""Well, may be!" said Prince Andrew. "Go, Masha; I'll come immediately."On the way to his sister's room, in the passage which connected one wingwith the other, Prince Andrew met Mademoiselle Bourienne smilingsweetly. It was the third time that day that, with an ecstatic andartless smile, she had met him in secluded passages."Oh! I thought you were in your room," she said, for some reasonblushing and dropping her eyes.Prince Andrew looked sternly at her and an expression of anger suddenlycame over his face. He said nothing to her but looked at her foreheadand hair, without looking at her eyes, with such contempt that theFrenchwoman blushed and went away without a word. When he reached hissister's room his wife was already awake and her merry voice, hurryingone word after another, came through the open door. She was speaking asusual in French, and as if after long self-restraint she wished to makeup for lost time."No, but imagine the old Countess Zubova, with false curls and her mouthfull of false teeth, as if she were trying to cheat old age.... Ha, ha,ha! Mary!"This very sentence about Countess Zubova and this same laugh PrinceAndrew had already heard from his wife in the presence of others somefive times. He entered the room softly. The little princess, plump androsy, was sitting in an easy chair with her work in her hands, talkingincessantly, repeating Petersburg reminiscences and even phrases. PrinceAndrew came up, stroked her hair, and asked if she felt rested aftertheir journey. She answered him and continued her chatter.The coach with six horses was waiting at the porch. It was an autumnnight, so dark that the coachman could not see the carriage pole.Servants with lanterns were bustling about in the porch. The immensehouse was brilliant with lights shining through its lofty windows. Thedomestic serfs were crowding in the hall, waiting to bid good-by to theyoung prince. The members of the household were all gathered in thereception hall: Michael Ivanovich, Mademoiselle Bourienne, PrincessMary, and the little princess. Prince Andrew had been called to hisfather's study as the latter wished to say good-by to him alone. Allwere waiting for them to come out.When Prince Andrew entered the study the old man in his old-agespectacles and white dressing gown, in which he received no one but hisson, sat at the table writing. He glanced round."Going?" And he went on writing."I've come to say good-by.""Kiss me here," and he touched his cheek: "Thanks, thanks!""What do you thank me for?""For not dilly-dallying and not hanging to a woman's apron strings. TheService before everything. Thanks, thanks!" And he went on writing, sothat his quill spluttered and squeaked. "If you have anything to say,say it. These two things can be done together," he added."About my wife... I am ashamed as it is to leave her on your hands...""Why talk nonsense? Say what you want.""When her confinement is due, send to Moscow for an accoucheur.... Lethim be here...."The old prince stopped writing and, as if not understanding, fixed hisstern eyes on his son."I know that no one can help if nature does not do her work," saidPrince Andrew, evidently confused. "I know that out of a million casesonly one goes wrong, but it is her fancy and mine. They have beentelling her things. She has had a dream and is frightened.""Hm... Hm..." muttered the old prince to himself, finishing what he waswriting. "I'll do it."He signed with a flourish and suddenly turning to his son began tolaugh."It's a bad business, eh?""What is bad, Father?""The wife!" said the old prince, briefly and significantly."I don't understand!" said Prince Andrew."No, it can't be helped, lad," said the prince. "They're all like that;one can't unmarry. Don't be afraid; I won't tell anyone, but you know ityourself."He seized his son by the hand with small bony fingers, shook it, lookedstraight into his son's face with keen eyes which seemed to see throughhim, and again laughed his frigid laugh.The son sighed, thus admitting that his father had understood him. Theold man continued to fold and seal his letter, snatching up and throwingdown the wax, the seal, and the paper, with his accustomed rapidity."What's to be done? She's pretty! I will do everything. Make your mindeasy," said he in abrupt sentences while sealing his letter.Andrew did not speak; he was both pleased and displeased that his fatherunderstood him. The old man got up and gave the letter to his son."Listen!" said he; "don't worry about your wife: what can be done shallbe. Now listen! Give this letter to Michael Ilarionovich. * I havewritten that he should make use of you in proper places and not keep youlong as an adjutant: a bad position! Tell him I remember and like him.Write and tell me how he receives you. If he is all right--serve him.Nicholas Bolkonski's son need not serve under anyone if he is indisfavor. Now come here."*Kutuzov.He spoke so rapidly that he did not finish half his words, but his sonwas accustomed to understand him. He led him to the desk, raised thelid, drew out a drawer, and took out an exercise book filled with hisbold, tall, close handwriting."I shall probably die before you. So remember, these are my memoirs;hand them to the Emperor after my death. Now here is a Lombard bond anda letter; it is a premium for the man who writes a history of Suvorov'swars. Send it to the Academy. Here are some jottings for you to readwhen I am gone. You will find them useful."Andrew did not tell his father that he would no doubt live a long timeyet. He felt that he must not say it."I will do it all, Father," he said."Well, now, good-by!" He gave his son his hand to kiss, and embracedhim. "Remember this, Prince Andrew, if they kill you it will hurt me,your old father..." he paused unexpectedly, and then in a querulousvoice suddenly shrieked: "but if I hear that you have not behaved like ason of Nicholas Bolkonski, I shall be ashamed!""You need not have said that to me, Father," said the son with a smile.The old man was silent."I also wanted to ask you," continued Prince Andrew, "if I'm killed andif I have a son, do not let him be taken away from you--as I saidyesterday... let him grow up with you.... Please.""Not let the wife have him?" said the old man, and laughed.They stood silent, facing one another. The old man's sharp eyes werefixed straight on his son's. Something twitched in the lower part of theold prince's face."We've said good-by. Go!" he suddenly shouted in a loud, angry voice,opening his door."What is it? What?" asked both princesses when they saw for a moment atthe door Prince Andrew and the figure of the old man in a white dressinggown, spectacled and wigless, shouting in an angry voice.Prince Andrew sighed and made no reply."Well!" he said, turning to his wife.And this "Well!" sounded coldly ironic, as if he were saying,: "Now gothrough your performance.""Andrew, already!" said the little princess, turning pale and lookingwith dismay at her husband.He embraced her. She screamed and fell unconscious on his shoulder.He cautiously released the shoulder she leaned on, looked into her face,and carefully placed her in an easy chair."Adieu, Mary," said he gently to his sister, taking her by the hand andkissing her, and then he left the room with rapid steps.The little princess lay in the armchair, Mademoiselle Bourienne chafingher temples. Princess Mary, supporting her sister-in-law, still lookedwith her beautiful eyes full of tears at the door through which PrinceAndrew had gone and made the sign of the cross in his direction. Fromthe study, like pistol shots, came the frequent sound of the old manangrily blowing his nose. Hardly had Prince Andrew gone when the studydoor opened quickly and the stern figure of the old man in the whitedressing gown looked out."Gone? That's all right!" said he; and looking angrily at theunconscious little princess, he shook his head reprovingly and slammedthe door.BOOK TWO: 1805CHAPTER IIn October, 1805, a Russian army was occupying the villages and towns ofthe Archduchy of Austria, and yet other regiments freshly arriving fromRussia were settling near the fortress of Braunau and burdening theinhabitants on whom they were quartered. Braunau was the headquarters ofthe commander-in-chief, Kutuzov.On October 11, 1805, one of the infantry regiments that had just reachedBraunau had halted half a mile from the town, waiting to be inspected bythe commander-in-chief. Despite the un-Russian appearance of thelocality and surroundings--fruit gardens, stone fences, tiled roofs, andhills in the distance--and despite the fact that the inhabitants (whogazed with curiosity at the soldiers) were not Russians, the regimenthad just the appearance of any Russian regiment preparing for aninspection anywhere in the heart of Russia.On the evening of the last day's march an order had been received thatthe commander-in-chief would inspect the regiment on the march. Thoughthe words of the order were not clear to the regimental commander, andthe question arose whether the troops were to be in marching order ornot, it was decided at a consultation between the battalion commandersto present the regiment in parade order, on the principle that it isalways better to "bow too low than not bow low enough." So the soldiers,after a twenty-mile march, were kept mending and cleaning all night longwithout closing their eyes, while the adjutants and company commanderscalculated and reckoned, and by morning the regiment--instead of thestraggling, disorderly crowd it had been on its last march the daybefore--presented a well-ordered array of two thousand men each of whomknew his place and his duty, had every button and every strap in place,and shone with cleanliness. And not only externally was all in order,but had it pleased the commander-in-chief to look under the uniforms hewould have found on every man a clean shirt, and in every knapsack theappointed number of articles, "awl, soap, and all," as the soldiers say.There was only one circumstance concerning which no one could be atease. It was the state of the soldiers' boots. More than half the men'sboots were in holes. But this defect was not due to any fault of theregimental commander, for in spite of repeated demands boots had notbeen issued by the Austrian commissariat, and the regiment had marchedsome seven hundred miles.The commander of the regiment was an elderly, choleric, stout, andthick-set general with grizzled eyebrows and whiskers, and wider fromchest to back than across the shoulders. He had on a brand-new uniformshowing the creases where it had been folded and thick gold epauletteswhich seemed to stand rather than lie down on his massive shoulders. Hehad the air of a man happily performing one of the most solemn duties ofhis life. He walked about in front of the line and at every step pulledhimself up, slightly arching his back. It was plain that the commanderadmired his regiment, rejoiced in it, and that his whole mind wasengrossed by it, yet his strut seemed to indicate that, besides militarymatters, social interests and the fair sex occupied no small part of histhoughts."Well, Michael Mitrich, sir?" he said, addressing one of the battalioncommanders who smilingly pressed forward (it was plain that they bothfelt happy). "We had our hands full last night. However, I think theregiment is not a bad one, eh?"The battalion commander perceived the jovial irony and laughed."It would not be turned off the field even on the Tsaritsin Meadow.""What?" asked the commander.At that moment, on the road from the town on which signalers had beenposted, two men appeared on horse back. They were an aide-de-campfollowed by a Cossack.The aide-de-camp was sent to confirm the order which had not beenclearly worded the day before, namely, that the commander-in-chiefwished to see the regiment just in the state in which it had been on themarch: in their greatcoats, and packs, and without any preparationwhatever.A member of the Hofkriegsrath from Vienna had come to Kutuzov the daybefore with proposals and demands for him to join up with the army ofthe Archduke Ferdinand and Mack, and Kutuzov, not considering thisjunction advisable, meant, among other arguments in support of his view,to show the Austrian general the wretched state in which the troopsarrived from Russia. With this object he intended to meet the regiment;so the worse the condition it was in, the better pleased the commander-in-chief would be. Though the aide-de-camp did not know thesecircumstances, he nevertheless delivered the definite order that the menshould be in their greatcoats and in marching order, and that thecommander-in-chief would otherwise be dissatisfied. On hearing this theregimental commander hung his head, silently shrugged his shoulders, andspread out his arms with a choleric gesture."A fine mess we've made of it!" he remarked."There now! Didn't I tell you, Michael Mitrich, that if it was said 'onthe march' it meant in greatcoats?" said he reproachfully to thebattalion commander. "Oh, my God!" he added, stepping resolutelyforward. "Company commanders!" he shouted in a voice accustomed tocommand. "Sergeants major!... How soon will he be here?" he asked theaide-de-camp with a respectful politeness evidently relating to thepersonage he was referring to."In an hour's time, I should say.""Shall we have time to change clothes?""I don't know, General...."The regimental commander, going up to the line himself, ordered thesoldiers to change into their greatcoats. The company commanders ran offto their companies, the sergeants major began bustling (the greatcoatswere not in very good condition), and instantly the squares that had upto then been in regular order and silent began to sway and stretch andhum with voices. On all sides soldiers were running to and fro, throwingup their knapsacks with a jerk of their shoulders and pulling the strapsover their heads, unstrapping their overcoats and drawing the sleeves onwith upraised arms.In half an hour all was again in order, only the squares had become grayinstead of black. The regimental commander walked with his jerky stepsto the front of the regiment and examined it from a distance."Whatever is this? This!" he shouted and stood still. "Commander of thethird company!""Commander of the third company wanted by the general!... commander tothe general... third company to the commander." The words passed alongthe lines and an adjutant ran to look for the missing officer.When the eager but misrepeated words had reached their destination in acry of: "The general to the third company," the missing officer appearedfrom behind his company and, though he was a middle-aged man and not inthe habit of running, trotted awkwardly stumbling on his toes toward thegeneral. The captain's face showed the uneasiness of a schoolboy who istold to repeat a lesson he has not learned. Spots appeared on his nose,the redness of which was evidently due to intemperance, and his mouthtwitched nervously. The general looked the captain up and down as hecame up panting, slackening his pace as he approached."You will soon be dressing your men in petticoats! What is this?"shouted the regimental commander, thrusting forward his jaw and pointingat a soldier in the ranks of the third company in a greatcoat of bluishcloth, which contrasted with the others. "What have you been after? Thecommander in chief is expected and you leave your place? Eh? I'll teachyou to dress the men in fancy coats for a parade.... Eh...?"The commander of the company, with his eyes fixed on his superior,pressed two fingers more and more rigidly to his cap, as if in thispressure lay his only hope of salvation."Well, why don't you speak? Whom have you got there dressed up as aHungarian?" said the commander with an austere gibe."Your excellency...""Well, your excellency, what? Your excellency! But what about yourexcellency?... nobody knows.""Your excellency, it's the officer Dolokhov, who has been reduced to theranks," said the captain softly."Well? Has he been degraded into a field marshal, or into a soldier? Ifa soldier, he should be dressed in regulation uniform like the others.""Your excellency, you gave him leave yourself, on the march.""Gave him leave? Leave? That's just like you young men," said theregimental commander cooling down a little. "Leave indeed.... One says aword to you and you... What?" he added with renewed irritation, "I begyou to dress your men decently."And the commander, turning to look at the adjutant, directed his jerkysteps down the line. He was evidently pleased at his own display ofanger and walking up to the regiment wished to find a further excuse forwrath. Having snapped at an officer for an unpolished badge, at anotherbecause his line was not straight, he reached the third company."H-o-o-w are you standing? Where's your leg? Your leg?" shouted thecommander with a tone of suffering in his voice, while there were stillfive men between him and Dolokhov with his bluish-gray uniform.Dolokhov slowly straightened his bent knee, looking straight with hisclear, insolent eyes in the general's face."Why a blue coat? Off with it... Sergeant major! Change his coat... theras..." he did not finish."General, I must obey orders, but I am not bound to endure..." Dolokhovhurriedly interrupted."No talking in the ranks!... No talking, no talking!""Not bound to endure insults," Dolokhov concluded in loud, ringingtones.The eyes of the general and the soldier met. The general became silent,angrily pulling down his tight scarf."I request you to have the goodness to change your coat," he said as heturned away.CHAPTER II"He's coming!" shouted the signaler at that moment.The regimental commander, flushing, ran to his horse, seized the stirrupwith trembling hands, threw his body across the saddle, righted himself,drew his saber, and with a happy and resolute countenance, opening hismouth awry, prepared to shout. The regiment fluttered like a birdpreening its plumage and became motionless."Att-ention!" shouted the regimental commander in a soul-shaking voicewhich expressed joy for himself, severity for the regiment, and welcomefor the approaching chief.Along the broad country road, edged on both sides by trees, came a high,light blue Viennese caleche, slightly creaking on its springs and drawnby six horses at a smart trot. Behind the caleche galloped the suite anda convoy of Croats. Beside Kutuzov sat an Austrian general, in a whiteuniform that looked strange among the Russian black ones. The calechestopped in front of the regiment. Kutuzov and the Austrian general weretalking in low voices and Kutuzov smiled slightly as treading heavily hestepped down from the carriage just as if those two thousand menbreathlessly gazing at him and the regimental commander did not exist.The word of command rang out, and again the regiment quivered, as with ajingling sound it presented arms. Then amidst a dead silence the feeblevoice of the commander-in-chief was heard. The regiment roared, "Healthto your ex... len... len... lency!" and again all became silent. Atfirst Kutuzov stood still while the regiment moved; then he and thegeneral in white, accompanied by the suite, walked between the ranks.From the way the regimental commander saluted the commander-in-chief anddevoured him with his eyes, drawing himself up obsequiously, and fromthe way he walked through the ranks behind the generals, bending forwardand hardly able to restrain his jerky movements, and from the way hedarted forward at every word or gesture of the commander-in-chief, itwas evident that he performed his duty as a subordinate with evengreater zeal than his duty as a commander. Thanks to the strictness andassiduity of its commander the regiment, in comparison with others thathad reached Braunau at the same time, was in splendid condition. Therewere only 217 sick and stragglers. Everything was in good order exceptthe boots.Kutuzov walked through the ranks, sometimes stopping to say a fewfriendly words to officers he had known in the Turkish war, sometimesalso to the soldiers. Looking at their boots he several times shook hishead sadly, pointing them out to the Austrian general with an expressionwhich seemed to say that he was not blaming anyone, but could not helpnoticing what a bad state of things it was. The regimental commander ranforward on each such occasion, fearing to miss a single word of thecommander-in-chief's regarding the regiment. Behind Kutuzov, at adistance that allowed every softly spoken word to be heard, followedsome twenty men of his suite. These gentlemen talked among themselvesand sometimes laughed. Nearest of all to the commander-in-chief walked ahandsome adjutant. This was Prince Bolkonski. Beside him was his comradeNesvitski, a tall staff officer, extremely stout, with a kindly,smiling, handsome face and moist eyes. Nesvitski could hardly keep fromlaughter provoked by a swarthy hussar officer who walked beside him.This hussar, with a grave face and without a smile or a change in theexpression of his fixed eyes, watched the regimental commander's backand mimicked his every movement. Each time the commander started andbent forward, the hussar started and bent forward in exactly the samemanner. Nesvitski laughed and nudged the others to make them look at thewag.Kutuzov walked slowly and languidly past thousands of eyes which werestarting from their sockets to watch their chief. On reaching the thirdcompany he suddenly stopped. His suite, not having expected this,involuntarily came closer to him."Ah, Timokhin!" said he, recognizing the red-nosed captain who had beenreprimanded on account of the blue greatcoat.One would have thought it impossible for a man to stretch himself morethan Timokhin had done when he was reprimanded by the regimentalcommander, but now that the commander-in-chief addressed him he drewhimself up to such an extent that it seemed he could not have sustainedit had the commander-in-chief continued to look at him, and so Kutuzov,who evidently understood his case and wished him nothing but good,quickly turned away, a scarcely perceptible smile flitting over hisscarred and puffy face."Another Ismail comrade," said he. "A brave officer! Are you satisfiedwith him?" he asked the regimental commander.And the latter--unconscious that he was being reflected in the hussarofficer as in a looking glass--started, moved forward, and answered:"Highly satisfied, your excellency!""We all have our weaknesses," said Kutuzov smiling and walking away fromhim. "He used to have a predilection for Bacchus."The regimental commander was afraid he might be blamed for this and didnot answer. The hussar at that moment noticed the face of the red-nosedcaptain and his drawn-in stomach, and mimicked his expression and posewith such exactitude that Nesvitski could not help laughing. Kutuzovturned round. The officer evidently had complete control of his face,and while Kutuzov was turning managed to make a grimace and then assumea most serious, deferential, and innocent expression.The third company was the last, and Kutuzov pondered, apparently tryingto recollect something. Prince Andrew stepped forward from among thesuite and said in French:"You told me to remind you of the officer Dolokhov, reduced to the ranksin this regiment.""Where is Dolokhov?" asked Kutuzov.Dolokhov, who had already changed into a soldier's gray greatcoat, didnot wait to be called. The shapely figure of the fair-haired soldier,with his clear blue eyes, stepped forward from the ranks, went up to thecommander in chief, and presented arms."Have you a complaint to make?" Kutuzov asked with a slight frown."This is Dolokhov," said Prince Andrew."Ah!" said Kutuzov. "I hope this will be a lesson to you. Do your duty.The Emperor is gracious, and I shan't forget you if you deserve well."The clear blue eyes looked at the commander-in-chief just as boldly asthey had looked at the regimental commander, seeming by their expressionto tear open the veil of convention that separates a commander-in-chiefso widely from a private."One thing I ask of your excellency," Dolokhov said in his firm,ringing, deliberate voice. "I ask an opportunity to atone for my faultand prove my devotion to His Majesty the Emperor and to Russia!"Kutuzov turned away. The same smile of the eyes with which he had turnedfrom Captain Timokhin again flitted over his face. He turned away with agrimace as if to say that everything Dolokhov had said to him andeverything he could say had long been known to him, that he was weary ofit and it was not at all what he wanted. He turned away and went to thecarriage.The regiment broke up into companies, which went to their appointedquarters near Braunau, where they hoped to receive boots and clothes andto rest after their hard marches."You won't bear me a grudge, Prokhor Ignatych?" said the regimentalcommander, overtaking the third company on its way to its quarters andriding up to Captain Timokhin who was walking in front. (The regimentalcommander's face now that the inspection was happily over beamed withirrepressible delight.) "It's in the Emperor's service... it can't behelped... one is sometimes a bit hasty on parade... I am the first toapologize, you know me!... He was very pleased!" And he held out hishand to the captain."Don't mention it, General, as if I'd be so bold!" replied the captain,his nose growing redder as he gave a smile which showed where two frontteeth were missing that had been knocked out by the butt end of a gun atIsmail."And tell Mr. Dolokhov that I won't forget him--he may be quite easy.And tell me, please--I've been meaning to ask--how is he behavinghimself, and in general...""As far as the service goes he is quite punctilious, your excellency;but his character..." said Timokhin."And what about his character?" asked the regimental commander."It's different on different days," answered the captain. "One day he issensible, well educated, and good-natured, and the next he's a wildbeast.... In Poland, if you please, he nearly killed a Jew.""Oh, well, well!" remarked the regimental commander. "Still, one musthave pity on a young man in misfortune. You know he has importantconnections... Well, then, you just...""I will, your excellency," said Timokhin, showing by his smile that heunderstood his commander's wish."Well, of course, of course!"The regimental commander sought out Dolokhov in the ranks and, reiningin his horse, said to him:"After the next affair... epaulettes."Dolokhov looked round but did not say anything, nor did the mockingsmile on his lips change."Well, that's all right," continued the regimental commander. "A cup ofvodka for the men from me," he added so that the soldiers could hear. "Ithank you all! God be praised!" and he rode past that company andovertook the next one."Well, he's really a good fellow, one can serve under him," saidTimokhin to the subaltern beside him."In a word, a hearty one..." said the subaltern, laughing (theregimental commander was nicknamed King of Hearts).The cheerful mood of their officers after the inspection infected thesoldiers. The company marched on gaily. The soldiers' voices could beheard on every side."And they said Kutuzov was blind of one eye?""And so he is! Quite blind!""No, friend, he is sharper-eyed than you are. Boots and leg bands... henoticed everything...""When he looked at my feet, friend... well, thinks I...""And that other one with him, the Austrian, looked as if he were smearedwith chalk--as white as flour! I suppose they polish him up as they dothe guns.""I say, Fedeshon!... Did he say when the battles are to begin? You werenear him. Everybody said that Buonaparte himself was at Braunau.""Buonaparte himself!... Just listen to the fool, what he doesn't know!The Prussians are up in arms now. The Austrians, you see, are puttingthem down. When they've been put down, the war with Buonaparte willbegin. And he says Buonaparte is in Braunau! Shows you're a fool. You'dbetter listen more carefully!""What devils these quartermasters are! See, the fifth company is turninginto the village already... they will have their buckwheat cooked beforewe reach our quarters.""Give me a biscuit, you devil!""And did you give me tobacco yesterday? That's just it, friend! Ah,well, never mind, here you are.""They might call a halt here or we'll have to do another four mileswithout eating.""Wasn't it fine when those Germans gave us lifts! You just sit still andare drawn along.""And here, friend, the people are quite beggarly. There they all seemedto be Poles--all under the Russian crown--but here they're all regularGermans.""Singers to the front" came the captain's order.And from the different ranks some twenty men ran to the front. Adrummer, their leader, turned round facing the singers, and flourishinghis arm, began a long-drawn-out soldiers' song, commencing with thewords: "Morning dawned, the sun was rising," and concluding: "On then,brothers, on to glory, led by Father Kamenski." This song had beencomposed in the Turkish campaign and now being sung in Austria, the onlychange being that the words "Father Kamenski" were replaced by "FatherKutuzov."Having jerked out these last words as soldiers do and waved his arms asif flinging something to the ground, the drummer--a lean, handsomesoldier of forty--looked sternly at the singers and screwed up his eyes.Then having satisfied himself that all eyes were fixed on him, he raisedboth arms as if carefully lifting some invisible but precious objectabove his head and, holding it there for some seconds, suddenly flung itdown and began:"Oh, my bower, oh, my bower...!""Oh, my bower new...!" chimed in twenty voices, and the castanet player,in spite of the burden of his equipment, rushed out to the front and,walking backwards before the company, jerked his shoulders andflourished his castanets as if threatening someone. The soldiers,swinging their arms and keeping time spontaneously, marched with longsteps. Behind the company the sound of wheels, the creaking of springs,and the tramp of horses' hoofs were heard. Kutuzov and his suite werereturning to the town. The commander-in-chief made a sign that the menshould continue to march at ease, and he and all his suite showedpleasure at the sound of the singing and the sight of the dancingsoldier and the gay and smartly marching men. In the second file fromthe right flank, beside which the carriage passed the company, a blue-eyed soldier involuntarily attracted notice. It was Dolokhov marchingwith particular grace and boldness in time to the song and looking atthose driving past as if he pitied all who were not at that momentmarching with the company. The hussar cornet of Kutuzov's suite who hadmimicked the regimental commander, fell back from the carriage and rodeup to Dolokhov.Hussar cornet Zherkov had at one time, in Petersburg, belonged to thewild set led by Dolokhov. Zherkov had met Dolokhov abroad as a privateand had not seen fit to recognize him. But now that Kutuzov had spokento the gentleman ranker, he addressed him with the cordiality of an oldfriend."My dear fellow, how are you?" said he through the singing, making hishorse keep pace with the company."How am I?" Dolokhov answered coldly. "I am as you see."The lively song gave a special flavor to the tone of free and easygaiety with which Zherkov spoke, and to the intentional coldness ofDolokhov's reply."And how do you get on with the officers?" inquired Zherkov."All right. They are good fellows. And how have you wriggled onto thestaff?""I was attached; I'm on duty."Both were silent."She let the hawk fly upward from her wide right sleeve," went the song,arousing an involuntary sensation of courage and cheerfulness. Theirconversation would probably have been different but for the effect ofthat song."Is it true that Austrians have been beaten?" asked Dolokhov."The devil only knows! They say so.""I'm glad," answered Dolokhov briefly and clearly, as the song demanded."I say, come round some evening and we'll have a game of faro!" saidZherkov."Why, have you too much money?""Do come.""I can't. I've sworn not to. I won't drink and won't play till I getreinstated.""Well, that's only till the first engagement.""We shall see."They were again silent."Come if you need anything. One can at least be of use on the staff..."Dolokhov smiled. "Don't trouble. If I want anything, I won't beg--I'lltake it!""Well, never mind; I only...""And I only...""Good-bye.""Good health...""It's a long, long way. To my native land..."Zherkov touched his horse with the spurs; it pranced excitedly from footto foot uncertain with which to start, then settled down, galloped pastthe company, and overtook the carriage, still keeping time to the song.CHAPTER IIIOn returning from the review, Kutuzov took the Austrian general into hisprivate room and, calling his adjutant, asked for some papers relatingto the condition of the troops on their arrival, and the letters thathad come from the Archduke Ferdinand, who was in command of the advancedarmy. Prince Andrew Bolkonski came into the room with the requiredpapers. Kutuzov and the Austrian member of the Hofkriegsrath weresitting at the table on which a plan was spread out."Ah!..." said Kutuzov glancing at Bolkonski as if by this exclamation hewas asking the adjutant to wait, and he went on with the conversation inFrench."All I can say, General," said he with a pleasant elegance of expressionand intonation that obliged one to listen to each deliberately spokenword. It was evident that Kutuzov himself listened with pleasure to hisown voice. "All I can say, General, is that if the matter depended on mypersonal wishes, the will of His Majesty the Emperor Francis would havebeen fulfilled long ago. I should long ago have joined the archduke. Andbelieve me on my honour that to me personally it would be a pleasure tohand over the supreme command of the army into the hands of a betterinformed and more skillful general--of whom Austria has so many--and tolay down all this heavy responsibility. But circumstances are sometimestoo strong for us, General."And Kutuzov smiled in a way that seemed to say, "You are quite atliberty not to believe me and I don't even care whether you do or not,but you have no grounds for telling me so. And that is the whole point."The Austrian general looked dissatisfied, but had no option but to replyin the same tone."On the contrary," he said, in a querulous and angry tone thatcontrasted with his flattering words, "on the contrary, yourexcellency's participation in the common action is highly valued by HisMajesty; but we think the present delay is depriving the splendidRussian troops and their commander of the laurels they have beenaccustomed to win in their battles," he concluded his evidentlyprearranged sentence.Kutuzov bowed with the same smile."But that is my conviction, and judging by the last letter with whichHis Highness the Archduke Ferdinand has honored me, I imagine that theAustrian troops, under the direction of so skillful a leader as GeneralMack, have by now already gained a decisive victory and no longer needour aid," said Kutuzov.The general frowned. Though there was no definite news of an Austriandefeat, there were many circumstances confirming the unfavorable rumorsthat were afloat, and so Kutuzov's suggestion of an Austrian victorysounded much like irony. But Kutuzov went on blandly smiling with thesame expression, which seemed to say that he had a right to suppose so.And, in fact, the last letter he had received from Mack's army informedhim of a victory and stated strategically the position of the army wasvery favorable."Give me that letter," said Kutuzov turning to Prince Andrew. "Pleasehave a look at it"--and Kutuzov with an ironical smile about the cornersof his mouth read to the Austrian general the following passage, inGerman, from the Archduke Ferdinand's letter:We have fully concentrated forces of nearly seventy thousand men withwhich to attack and defeat the enemy should he cross the Lech. Also, aswe are masters of Ulm, we cannot be deprived of the advantage ofcommanding both sides of the Danube, so that should the enemy not crossthe Lech, we can cross the Danube, throw ourselves on his line ofcommunications, recross the river lower down, and frustrate hisintention should he try to direct his whole force against our faithfulally. We shall therefore confidently await the moment when the ImperialRussian army will be fully equipped, and shall then, in conjunction withit, easily find a way to prepare for the enemy the fate he deserves.Kutuzov sighed deeply on finishing this paragraph and looked at themember of the Hofkriegsrath mildly and attentively."But you know the wise maxim your excellency, advising one to expect theworst," said the Austrian general, evidently wishing to have done withjests and to come to business. He involuntarily looked round at theaide-de-camp."Excuse me, General," interrupted Kutuzov, also turning to PrinceAndrew. "Look here, my dear fellow, get from Kozlovski all the reportsfrom our scouts. Here are two letters from Count Nostitz and here is onefrom His Highness the Archduke Ferdinand and here are these," he said,handing him several papers, "make a neat memorandum in French out of allthis, showing all the news we have had of the movements of the Austrianarmy, and then give it to his excellency."Prince Andrew bowed his head in token of having understood from thefirst not only what had been said but also what Kutuzov would have likedto tell him. He gathered up the papers and with a bow to both, steppedsoftly over the carpet and went out into the waiting room.Though not much time had passed since Prince Andrew had left Russia, hehad changed greatly during that period. In the expression of his face,in his movements, in his walk, scarcely a trace was left of his formeraffected languor and indolence. He now looked like a man who has time tothink of the impression he makes on others, but is occupied withagreeable and interesting work. His face expressed more satisfactionwith himself and those around him, his smile and glance were brighterand more attractive.Kutuzov, whom he had overtaken in Poland, had received him very kindly,promised not to forget him, distinguished him above the other adjutants,and had taken him to Vienna and given him the more serious commissions.From Vienna Kutuzov wrote to his old comrade, Prince Andrew's father.Your son bids fair to become an officer distinguished by his industry,firmness, and expedition. I consider myself fortunate to have such asubordinate by me.On Kutuzov's staff, among his fellow officers and in the army generally,Prince Andrew had, as he had had in Petersburg society, two quiteopposite reputations. Some, a minority, acknowledged him to be differentfrom themselves and from everyone else, expected great things of him,listened to him, admired, and imitated him, and with them Prince Andrewwas natural and pleasant. Others, the majority, disliked him andconsidered him conceited, cold, and disagreeable. But among these peoplePrince Andrew knew how to take his stand so that they respected and evenfeared him.Coming out of Kutuzov's room into the waiting room with the papers inhis hand Prince Andrew came up to his comrade, the aide-de-camp on duty,Kozlovski, who was sitting at the window with a book."Well, Prince?" asked Kozlovski."I am ordered to write a memorandum explaining why we are notadvancing.""And why is it?"Prince Andrew shrugged his shoulders."Any news from Mack?""No.""If it were true that he has been beaten, news would have come.""Probably," said Prince Andrew moving toward the outer door.But at that instant a tall Austrian general in a greatcoat, with theorder of Maria Theresa on his neck and a black bandage round his head,who had evidently just arrived, entered quickly, slamming the door.Prince Andrew stopped short."Commander in Chief Kutuzov?" said the newly arrived general speakingquickly with a harsh German accent, looking to both sides and advancingstraight toward the inner door."The commander-in-chief is engaged," said Kozlovski, going hurriedly upto the unknown general and blocking his way to the door. "Whom shall Iannounce?"The unknown general looked disdainfully down at Kozlovski, who wasrather short, as if surprised that anyone should not know him."The commander-in-chief is engaged," repeated Kozlovski calmly.The general's face clouded, his lips quivered and trembled. He took outa notebook, hurriedly scribbled something in pencil, tore out the leaf,gave it to Kozlovski, stepped quickly to the window, and threw himselfinto a chair, gazing at those in the room as if asking, "Why do theylook at me?" Then he lifted his head, stretched his neck as if heintended to say something, but immediately, with affected indifference,began to hum to himself, producing a queer sound which immediately brokeoff. The door of the private room opened and Kutuzov appeared in thedoorway. The general with the bandaged head bent forward as thoughrunning away from some danger, and, making long, quick strides with histhin legs, went up to Kutuzov."Vous voyez le malheureux Mack," he uttered in a broken voice.Kutuzov's face as he stood in the open doorway remained perfectlyimmobile for a few moments. Then wrinkles ran over his face like a waveand his forehead became smooth again, he bowed his head respectfully,closed his eyes, silently let Mack enter his room before him, and closedthe door himself behind him.The report which had been circulated that the Austrians had been beatenand that the whole army had surrendered at Ulm proved to be correct.Within half an hour adjutants had been sent in various directions withorders which showed that the Russian troops, who had hitherto beeninactive, would also soon have to meet the enemy.Prince Andrew was one of those rare staff officers whose chief interestlay in the general progress of the war. When he saw Mack and heard thedetails of his disaster he understood that half the campaign was lost,understood all the difficulties of the Russian army's position, andvividly imagined what awaited it and the part he would have to play.Involuntarily he felt a joyful agitation at the thought of thehumiliation of arrogant Austria and that in a week's time he might,perhaps, see and take part in the first Russian encounter with theFrench since Suvorov met them. He feared that Bonaparte's genius mightoutweigh all the courage of the Russian troops, and at the same timecould not admit the idea of his hero being disgraced.Excited and irritated by these thoughts Prince Andrew went toward hisroom to write to his father, to whom he wrote every day. In the corridorhe met Nesvitski, with whom he shared a room, and the wag Zherkov; theywere as usual laughing."Why are you so glum?" asked Nesvitski noticing Prince Andrew's paleface and glittering eyes."There's nothing to be gay about," answered Bolkonski.Just as Prince Andrew met Nesvitski and Zherkov, there came toward themfrom the other end of the corridor, Strauch, an Austrian general who onKutuzov's staff in charge of the provisioning of the Russian army, andthe member of the Hofkriegsrath who had arrived the previous evening.There was room enough in the wide corridor for the generals to pass thethree officers quite easily, but Zherkov, pushing Nesvitski aside withhis arm, said in a breathless voice,"They're coming!... they're coming!... Stand aside, make way, pleasemake way!"The generals were passing by, looking as if they wished to avoidembarrassing attentions. On the face of the wag Zherkov there suddenlyappeared a stupid smile of glee which he seemed unable to suppress."Your excellency," said he in German, stepping forward and addressingthe Austrian general, "I have the honor to congratulate you."He bowed his head and scraped first with one foot and then with theother, awkwardly, like a child at a dancing lesson.The member of the Hofkriegsrath looked at him severely but, seeing theseriousness of his stupid smile, could not but give him a moment'sattention. He screwed up his eyes showing that he was listening."I have the honor to congratulate you. General Mack has arrived, quitewell, only a little bruised just here," he added, pointing with abeaming smile to his head.The general frowned, turned away, and went on."Gott, wie naiv!" * said he angrily, after he had gone a few steps.* "Good God, what simplicity!"Nesvitski with a laugh threw his arms round Prince Andrew, butBolkonski, turning still paler, pushed him away with an angry look andturned to Zherkov. The nervous irritation aroused by the appearance ofMack, the news of his defeat, and the thought of what lay before theRussian army found vent in anger at Zherkov's untimely jest."If you, sir, choose to make a buffoon of yourself," he said sharply,with a slight trembling of the lower jaw, "I can't prevent your doingso; but I warn you that if you dare to play the fool in my presence, Iwill teach you to behave yourself."Nesvitski and Zherkov were so surprised by this outburst that they gazedat Bolkonski silently with wide-open eyes."What's the matter? I only congratulated them," said Zherkov."I am not jesting with you; please be silent!" cried Bolkonski, andtaking Nesvitski's arm he left Zherkov, who did not know what to say."Come, what's the matter, old fellow?" said Nesvitski trying to soothehim."What's the matter?" exclaimed Prince Andrew standing still in hisexcitement. "Don't you understand that either we are officers servingour Tsar and our country, rejoicing in the successes and grieving at themisfortunes of our common cause, or we are merely lackeys who carenothing for their master's business. Quarante mille hommes massacres etl'armee de nos allies detruite, et vous trouvez la le mot pour rire," *he said, as if strengthening his views by this French sentence. "C'estbien pour un garcon de rien comme cet individu dont vous avez fait unami, mais pas pour vous, pas pour vous. *(2) Only a hobbledehoy couldamuse himself in this way," he added in Russian--but pronouncing theword with a French accent--having noticed that Zherkov could still hearhim.* "Forty thousand men massacred and the army of our allies destroyed,and you find that a cause for jesting!"* (2) "It is all very well for that good-for-nothing fellow of whom youhave made a friend, but not for you, not for you."He waited a moment to see whether the cornet would answer, but he turnedand went out of the corridor.CHAPTER IVThe Pavlograd Hussars were stationed two miles from Braunau. Thesquadron in which Nicholas Rostov served as a cadet was quartered in theGerman village of Salzeneck. The best quarters in the village wereassigned to cavalry-captain Denisov, the squadron commander, knownthroughout the whole cavalry division as Vaska Denisov. Cadet Rostov,ever since he had overtaken the regiment in Poland, had lived with thesquadron commander.On October 11, the day when all was astir at headquarters over the newsof Mack's defeat, the camp life of the officers of this squadron wasproceeding as usual. Denisov, who had been losing at cards all night,had not yet come home when Rostov rode back early in the morning from aforaging expedition. Rostov in his cadet uniform, with a jerk to hishorse, rode up to the porch, swung his leg over the saddle with a suppleyouthful movement, stood for a moment in the stirrup as if loathe topart from his horse, and at last sprang down and called to his orderly."Ah, Bondarenko, dear friend!" said he to the hussar who rushed upheadlong to the horse. "Walk him up and down, my dear fellow," hecontinued, with that gay brotherly cordiality which goodhearted youngpeople show to everyone when they are happy."Yes, your excellency," answered the Ukrainian gaily, tossing his head."Mind, walk him up and down well!"Another hussar also rushed toward the horse, but Bondarenko had alreadythrown the reins of the snaffle bridle over the horse's head. It wasevident that the cadet was liberal with his tips and that it paid toserve him. Rostov patted the horse's neck and then his flank, andlingered for a moment."Splendid! What a horse he will be!" he thought with a smile, andholding up his saber, his spurs jingling, he ran up the steps of theporch. His landlord, who in a waistcoat and a pointed cap, pitchfork inhand, was clearing manure from the cowhouse, looked out, and his faceimmediately brightened on seeing Rostov. "Schon gut Morgen! Schon gutMorgen!" * he said winking with a merry smile, evidently pleased togreet the young man.* "A very good morning! A very good morning!""Schon fleissig?" * said Rostov with the same gay brotherly smile whichdid not leave his eager face. "Hoch Oestreicher! Hoch Russen! KaiserAlexander hoch!" *(2) said he, quoting words often repeated by theGerman landlord.* "Busy already?"* (2) "Hurrah for the Austrians! Hurrah for the Russians! Hurrah forEmperor Alexander!"The German laughed, came out of the cowshed, pulled off his cap, andwaving it above his head cried:"Und die ganze Welt hoch!" ** "And hurrah for the whole world!"Rostov waved his cap above his head like the German and cried laughing,"Und vivat die ganze Welt!" Though neither the German cleaning hiscowshed nor Rostov back with his platoon from foraging for hay had anyreason for rejoicing, they looked at each other with joyful delight andbrotherly love, wagged their heads in token of their mutual affection,and parted smiling, the German returning to his cowshed and Rostov goingto the cottage he occupied with Denisov."What about your master?" he asked Lavrushka, Denisov's orderly, whomall the regiment knew for a rogue."Hasn't been in since the evening. Must have been losing," answeredLavrushka. "I know by now, if he wins he comes back early to brag aboutit, but if he stays out till morning it means he's lost and will comeback in a rage. Will you have coffee?""Yes, bring some."Ten minutes later Lavrushka brought the coffee. "He's coming!" said he."Now for trouble!" Rostov looked out of the window and saw Denisovcoming home. Denisov was a small man with a red face, sparkling blackeyes, and black tousled mustache and hair. He wore an unfastened cloak,wide breeches hanging down in creases, and a crumpled shako on the backof his head. He came up to the porch gloomily, hanging his head."Lavwuska!" he shouted loudly and angrily, "take it off, blockhead!""Well, I am taking it off," replied Lavrushka's voice."Ah, you're up already," said Denisov, entering the room."Long ago," answered Rostov, "I have already been for the hay, and haveseen Fraulein Mathilde.""Weally! And I've been losing, bwother. I lost yesterday like a damnedfool!" cried Denisov, not pronouncing his r's. "Such ill luck! Such illluck. As soon as you left, it began and went on. Hullo there! Tea!"Puckering up his face though smiling, and showing his short strongteeth, he began with stubby fingers of both hands to ruffle up his thicktangled black hair."And what devil made me go to that wat?" (an officer nicknamed "therat") he said, rubbing his forehead and whole face with both hands."Just fancy, he didn't let me win a single cahd, not one cahd."He took the lighted pipe that was offered to him, gripped it in hisfist, and tapped it on the floor, making the sparks fly, while hecontinued to shout."He lets one win the singles and collahs it as soon as one doubles it;gives the singles and snatches the doubles!"He scattered the burning tobacco, smashed the pipe, and threw it away.Then he remained silent for a while, and all at once looked cheerfullywith his glittering, black eyes at Rostov."If at least we had some women here; but there's nothing foh one to dobut dwink. If we could only get to fighting soon. Hullo, who's there?"he said, turning to the door as he heard a tread of heavy boots and theclinking of spurs that came to a stop, and a respectful cough."The squadron quartermaster!" said Lavrushka.Denisov's face puckered still more."Wetched!" he muttered, throwing down a purse with some gold in it."Wostov, deah fellow, just see how much there is left and shove thepurse undah the pillow," he said, and went out to the quartermaster.Rostov took the money and, mechanically arranging the old and new coinsin separate piles, began counting them."Ah! Telyanin! How d'ye do? They plucked me last night," came Denisov'svoice from the next room."Where? At Bykov's, at the rat's... I knew it," replied a piping voice,and Lieutenant Telyanin, a small officer of the same squadron, enteredthe room.Rostov thrust the purse under the pillow and shook the damp little handwhich was offered him. Telyanin for some reason had been transferredfrom the Guards just before this campaign. He behaved very well in theregiment but was not liked; Rostov especially detested him and wasunable to overcome or conceal his groundless antipathy to the man."Well, young cavalryman, how is my Rook behaving?" he asked. (Rook was ayoung horse Telyanin had sold to Rostov.)The lieutenant never looked the man he was speaking to straight in theface; his eyes continually wandered from one object to another."I saw you riding this morning..." he added."Oh, he's all right, a good horse," answered Rostov, though the horsefor which he had paid seven hundred rubbles was not worth half that sum."He's begun to go a little lame on the left foreleg," he added."The hoof's cracked! That's nothing. I'll teach you what to do and showyou what kind of rivet to use.""Yes, please do," said Rostov."I'll show you, I'll show you! It's not a secret. And it's a horseyou'll thank me for.""Then I'll have it brought round," said Rostov wishing to avoidTelyanin, and he went out to give the order.In the passage Denisov, with a pipe, was squatting on the thresholdfacing the quartermaster who was reporting to him. On seeing Rostov,Denisov screwed up his face and pointing over his shoulder with histhumb to the room where Telyanin was sitting, he frowned and gave ashudder of disgust."Ugh! I don't like that fellow," he said, regardless of thequartermaster's presence.Rostov shrugged his shoulders as much as to say: "Nor do I, but what'sone to do?" and, having given his order, he returned to Telyanin.Telyanin was sitting in the same indolent pose in which Rostov had lefthim, rubbing his small white hands."Well there certainly are disgusting people," thought Rostov as heentered."Have you told them to bring the horse?" asked Telyanin, getting up andlooking carelessly about him."I have.""Let us go ourselves. I only came round to ask Denisov about yesterday'sorder. Have you got it, Denisov?""Not yet. But where are you off to?""I want to teach this young man how to shoe a horse," said Telyanin.They went through the porch and into the stable. The lieutenantexplained how to rivet the hoof and went away to his own quarters.When Rostov went back there was a bottle of vodka and a sausage on thetable. Denisov was sitting there scratching with his pen on a sheet ofpaper. He looked gloomily in Rostov's face and said: "I am witing toher."He leaned his elbows on the table with his pen in his hand and,evidently glad of a chance to say quicker in words what he wanted towrite, told Rostov the contents of his letter."You see, my fwiend," he said, "we sleep when we don't love. We arechildwen of the dust... but one falls in love and one is a God, one ispua' as on the first day of cweation... Who's that now? Send him to thedevil, I'm busy!" he shouted to Lavrushka, who went up to him not in theleast abashed."Who should it be? You yourself told him to come. It's the quartermasterfor the money."Denisov frowned and was about to shout some reply but stopped."Wetched business," he muttered to himself. "How much is left in thepuhse?" he asked, turning to Rostov."Seven new and three old imperials.""Oh, it's wetched! Well, what are you standing there for, you sca'cwow?Call the quahtehmasteh," he shouted to Lavrushka."Please, Denisov, let me lend you some: I have some, you know," saidRostov, blushing."Don't like bowwowing from my own fellows, I don't," growled Denisov."But if you won't accept money from me like a comrade, you will offendme. Really I have some," Rostov repeated."No, I tell you."And Denisov went to the bed to get the purse from under the pillow."Where have you put it, Wostov?""Under the lower pillow.""It's not there."Denisov threw both pillows on the floor. The purse was not there."That's a miwacle.""Wait, haven't you dropped it?" said Rostov, picking up the pillows oneat a time and shaking them.He pulled off the quilt and shook it. The purse was not there."Dear me, can I have forgotten? No, I remember thinking that you kept itunder your head like a treasure," said Rostov. "I put it just here.Where is it?" he asked, turning to Lavrushka."I haven't been in the room. It must be where you put it.""But it isn't?...""You're always like that; you thwow a thing down anywhere and forget it.Feel in your pockets.""No, if I hadn't thought of it being a treasure," said Rostov, "but Iremember putting it there."Lavrushka turned all the bedding over, looked under the bed and underthe table, searched everywhere, and stood still in the middle of theroom. Denisov silently watched Lavrushka's movements, and when thelatter threw up his arms in surprise saying it was nowhere to be foundDenisov glanced at Rostov."Wostov, you've not been playing schoolboy twicks..."Rostov felt Denisov's gaze fixed on him, raised his eyes, and instantlydropped them again. All the blood which had seemed congested somewherebelow his throat rushed to his face and eyes. He could not draw breath."And there hasn't been anyone in the room except the lieutenant andyourselves. It must be here somewhere," said Lavrushka."Now then, you devil's puppet, look alive and hunt for it!" shoutedDenisov, suddenly, turning purple and rushing at the man with athreatening gesture. "If the purse isn't found I'll flog you, I'll flogyou all."Rostov, his eyes avoiding Denisov, began buttoning his coat, buckled onhis saber, and put on his cap."I must have that purse, I tell you," shouted Denisov, shaking hisorderly by the shoulders and knocking him against the wall."Denisov, let him alone, I know who has taken it," said Rostov, goingtoward the door without raising his eyes. Denisov paused, thought amoment, and, evidently understanding what Rostov hinted at, seized hisarm."Nonsense!" he cried, and the veins on his forehead and neck stood outlike cords. "You are mad, I tell you. I won't allow it. The purse ishere! I'll flay this scoundwel alive, and it will be found.""I know who has taken it," repeated Rostov in an unsteady voice, andwent to the door."And I tell you, don't you dahe to do it!" shouted Denisov, rushing atthe cadet to restrain him.But Rostov pulled away his arm and, with as much anger as though Denisovwere his worst enemy, firmly fixed his eyes directly on his face."Do you understand what you're saying?" he said in a trembling voice."There was no one else in the room except myself. So that if it is notso, then..."He could not finish, and ran out of the room."Ah, may the devil take you and evewybody," were the last words Rostovheard.Rostov went to Telyanin's quarters."The master is not in, he's gone to headquarters," said Telyanin'sorderly. "Has something happened?" he added, surprised at the cadet'stroubled face."No, nothing.""You've only just missed him," said the orderly.The headquarters were situated two miles away from Salzeneck, andRostov, without returning home, took a horse and rode there. There wasan inn in the village which the officers frequented. Rostov rode up toit and saw Telyanin's horse at the porch.In the second room of the inn the lieutenant was sitting over a dish ofsausages and a bottle of wine."Ah, you've come here too, young man!" he said, smiling and raising hiseyebrows."Yes," said Rostov as if it cost him a great deal to utter the word; andhe sat down at the nearest table.Both were silent. There were two Germans and a Russian officer in theroom. No one spoke and the only sounds heard were the clatter of knivesand the munching of the lieutenant.When Telyanin had finished his lunch he took out of his pocket a doublepurse and, drawing its rings aside with his small, white, turned-upfingers, drew out a gold imperial, and lifting his eyebrows gave it tothe waiter."Please be quick," he said.The coin was a new one. Rostov rose and went up to Telyanin."Allow me to look at your purse," he said in a low, almost inaudible,voice.With shifting eyes but eyebrows still raised, Telyanin handed him thepurse."Yes, it's a nice purse. Yes, yes," he said, growing suddenly pale, andadded, "Look at it, young man."Rostov took the purse in his hand, examined it and the money in it, andlooked at Telyanin. The lieutenant was looking about in his usual wayand suddenly seemed to grow very merry."If we get to Vienna I'll get rid of it there but in these wretchedlittle towns there's nowhere to spend it," said he. "Well, let me haveit, young man, I'm going."Rostov did not speak."And you? Are you going to have lunch too? They feed you quite decentlyhere," continued Telyanin. "Now then, let me have it."He stretched out his hand to take hold of the purse. Rostov let go ofit. Telyanin took the purse and began carelessly slipping it into thepocket of his riding breeches, with his eyebrows lifted and his mouthslightly open, as if to say, "Yes, yes, I am putting my purse in mypocket and that's quite simple and is no one else's business.""Well, young man?" he said with a sigh, and from under his lifted browshe glanced into Rostov's eyes.Some flash as of an electric spark shot from Telyanin's eyes to Rostov'sand back, and back again and again in an instant."Come here," said Rostov, catching hold of Telyanin's arm and almostdragging him to the window. "That money is Denisov's; you took it..." hewhispered just above Telyanin's ear."What? What? How dare you? What?" said Telyanin.But these words came like a piteous, despairing cry and an entreaty forpardon. As soon as Rostov heard them, an enormous load of doubt fellfrom him. He was glad, and at the same instant began to pity themiserable man who stood before him, but the task he had begun had to becompleted."Heaven only knows what the people here may imagine," muttered Telyanin,taking up his cap and moving toward a small empty room. "We must have anexplanation...""I know it and shall prove it," said Rostov."I..."Every muscle of Telyanin's pale, terrified face began to quiver, hiseyes still shifted from side to side but with a downward look not risingto Rostov's face, and his sobs were audible."Count!... Don't ruin a young fellow... here is this wretched money,take it..." He threw it on the table. "I have an old father andmother!..."Rostov took the money, avoiding Telyanin's eyes, and went out of theroom without a word. But at the door he stopped and then retraced hissteps. "O God," he said with tears in his eyes, "how could you do it?""Count..." said Telyanin drawing nearer to him."Don't touch me," said Rostov, drawing back. "If you need it, take themoney," and he threw the purse to him and ran out of the inn.CHAPTER VThat same evening there was an animated discussion among the squadron'sofficers in Denisov's quarters."And I tell you, Rostov, that you must apologize to the colonel!" said atall, grizzly-haired staff captain, with enormous mustaches and manywrinkles on his large features, to Rostov who was crimson withexcitement.The staff captain, Kirsten, had twice been reduced to the ranks foraffairs of honor and had twice regained his commission."I will allow no one to call me a liar!" cried Rostov. "He told me Ilied, and I told him he lied. And there it rests. He may keep me on dutyevery day, or may place me under arrest, but no one can make meapologize, because if he, as commander of this regiment, thinks itbeneath his dignity to give me satisfaction, then...""You just wait a moment, my dear fellow, and listen," interrupted thestaff captain in his deep bass, calmly stroking his long mustache. "Youtell the colonel in the presence of other officers that an officer hasstolen...""I'm not to blame that the conversation began in the presence of otherofficers. Perhaps I ought not to have spoken before them, but I am not adiplomatist. That's why I joined the hussars, thinking that here onewould not need finesse; and he tells me that I am lying--so let him giveme satisfaction...""That's all right. No one thinks you a coward, but that's not the point.Ask Denisov whether it is not out of the question for a cadet to demandsatisfaction of his regimental commander?"Denisov sat gloomily biting his mustache and listening to theconversation, evidently with no wish to take part in it. He answered thestaff captain's question by a disapproving shake of his head."You speak to the colonel about this nasty business before otherofficers," continued the staff captain, "and Bogdanich" (the colonel wascalled Bogdanich) "shuts you up.""He did not shut me up, he said I was telling an untruth.""Well, have it so, and you talked a lot of nonsense to him and mustapologize.""Not on any account!" exclaimed Rostov."I did not expect this of you," said the staff captain seriously andseverely. "You don't wish to apologize, but, man, it's not only to himbut to the whole regiment--all of us--you're to blame all round. Thecase is this: you ought to have thought the matter over and takenadvice; but no, you go and blurt it all straight out before theofficers. Now what was the colonel to do? Have the officer tried anddisgrace the whole regiment? Disgrace the whole regiment because of onescoundrel? Is that how you look at it? We don't see it like that. AndBogdanich was a brick: he told you you were saying what was not true.It's not pleasant, but what's to be done, my dear fellow? You landedyourself in it. And now, when one wants to smooth the thing over, someconceit prevents your apologizing, and you wish to make the whole affairpublic. You are offended at being put on duty a bit, but why notapologize to an old and honorable officer? Whatever Bogdanich may be,anyway he is an honorable and brave old colonel! You're quick at takingoffense, but you don't mind disgracing the whole regiment!" The staffcaptain's voice began to tremble. "You have been in the regiment next tono time, my lad, you're here today and tomorrow you'll be appointedadjutant somewhere and can snap your fingers when it is said 'There arethieves among the Pavlograd officers!' But it's not all the same to us!Am I not right, Denisov? It's not the same!"Denisov remained silent and did not move, but occasionally looked withhis glittering black eyes at Rostov."You value your own pride and don't wish to apologize," continued thestaff captain, "but we old fellows, who have grown up in and, Godwilling, are going to die in the regiment, we prize the honor of theregiment, and Bogdanich knows it. Oh, we do prize it, old fellow! Andall this is not right, it's not right! You may take offense or not but Ialways stick to mother truth. It's not right!"And the staff captain rose and turned away from Rostov."That's twue, devil take it!" shouted Denisov, jumping up. "Now then,Wostov, now then!"Rostov, growing red and pale alternately, looked first at one officerand then at the other."No, gentlemen, no... you mustn't think... I quite understand. You'rewrong to think that of me... I... for me... for the honor of theregiment I'd... Ah well, I'll show that in action, and for me the honorof the flag... Well, never mind, it's true I'm to blame, to blame allround. Well, what else do you want?...""Come, that's right, Count!" cried the staff captain, turning round andclapping Rostov on the shoulder with his big hand."I tell you," shouted Denisov, "he's a fine fellow.""That's better, Count," said the staff captain, beginning to addressRostov by his title, as if in recognition of his confession. "Go andapologize, your excellency. Yes, go!""Gentlemen, I'll do anything. No one shall hear a word from me," saidRostov in an imploring voice, "but I can't apologize, by God I can't, dowhat you will! How can I go and apologize like a little boy askingforgiveness?"Denisov began to laugh."It'll be worse for you. Bogdanich is vindictive and you'll pay for yourobstinacy," said Kirsten."No, on my word it's not obstinacy! I can't describe the feeling. Ican't...""Well, it's as you like," said the staff captain. "And what has becomeof that scoundrel?" he asked Denisov."He has weported himself sick, he's to be stwuck off the list tomowwow,"muttered Denisov."It is an illness, there's no other way of explaining it," said thestaff captain."Illness or not, he'd better not cwoss my path. I'd kill him!" shoutedDenisov in a bloodthirsty tone.Just then Zherkov entered the room."What brings you here?" cried the officers turning to the newcomer."We're to go into action, gentlemen! Mack has surrendered with his wholearmy.""It's not true!""I've seen him myself!""What? Saw the real Mack? With hands and feet?""Into action! Into action! Bring him a bottle for such news! But how didyou come here?""I've been sent back to the regiment all on account of that devil, Mack.An Austrian general complained of me. I congratulated him on Mack'sarrival... What's the matter, Rostov? You look as if you'd just come outof a hot bath.""Oh, my dear fellow, we're in such a stew here these last two days."The regimental adjutant came in and confirmed the news brought byZherkov. They were under orders to advance next day."We're going into action, gentlemen!""Well, thank God! We've been sitting here too long!"CHAPTER VIKutuzov fell back toward Vienna, destroying behind him the bridges overthe rivers Inn (at Braunau) and Traun (near Linz). On October 23 theRussian troops were crossing the river Enns. At midday the Russianbaggage train, the artillery, and columns of troops were defilingthrough the town of Enns on both sides of the bridge.It was a warm, rainy, autumnal day. The wide expanse that opened outbefore the heights on which the Russian batteries stood guarding thebridge was at times veiled by a diaphanous curtain of slanting rain, andthen, suddenly spread out in the sunlight, far-distant objects could beclearly seen glittering as though freshly varnished. Down below, thelittle town could be seen with its white, red-roofed houses, itscathedral, and its bridge, on both sides of which streamed jostlingmasses of Russian troops. At the bend of the Danube, vessels, an island,and a castle with a park surrounded by the waters of the confluence ofthe Enns and the Danube became visible, and the rocky left bank of theDanube covered with pine forests, with a mystic background of greentreetops and bluish gorges. The turrets of a convent stood out beyond awild virgin pine forest, and far away on the other side of the Enns theenemy's horse patrols could be discerned.Among the field guns on the brow of the hill the general in command ofthe rearguard stood with a staff officer, scanning the country throughhis fieldglass. A little behind them Nesvitski, who had been sent to therearguard by the commander-in-chief, was sitting on the trail of a guncarriage. A Cossack who accompanied him had handed him a knapsack and aflask, and Nesvitski was treating some officers to pies and realdoppelkummel. The officers gladly gathered round him, some on theirknees, some squatting Turkish fashion on the wet grass."Yes, the Austrian prince who built that castle was no fool. It's a fineplace! Why are you not eating anything, gentlemen?" Nesvitski wassaying."Thank you very much, Prince," answered one of the officers, pleased tobe talking to a staff officer of such importance. "It's a lovely place!We passed close to the park and saw two deer... and what a splendidhouse!""Look, Prince," said another, who would have dearly liked to takeanother pie but felt shy, and therefore pretended to be examining thecountryside--"See, our infantrymen have already got there. Look there inthe meadow behind the village, three of them are dragging something.They'll ransack that castle," he remarked with evident approval."So they will," said Nesvitski. "No, but what I should like," added he,munching a pie in his moist-lipped handsome mouth, "would be to slip inover there."He pointed with a smile to a turreted nunnery, and his eyes narrowed andgleamed."That would be fine, gentlemen!"The officers laughed."Just to flutter the nuns a bit. They say there are Italian girls amongthem. On my word I'd give five years of my life for it!""They must be feeling dull, too," said one of the bolder officers,laughing.Meanwhile the staff officer standing in front pointed out something tothe general, who looked through his field glass."Yes, so it is, so it is," said the general angrily, lowering the fieldglass and shrugging his shoulders, "so it is! They'll be fired on at thecrossing. And why are they dawdling there?"On the opposite side the enemy could be seen by the naked eye, and fromtheir battery a milk-white cloud arose. Then came the distant report ofa shot, and our troops could be seen hurrying to the crossing.Nesvitski rose, puffing, and went up to the general, smiling."Would not your excellency like a little refreshment?" he said."It's a bad business," said the general without answering him, "our menhave been wasting time.""Hadn't I better ride over, your excellency?" asked Nesvitski."Yes, please do," answered the general, and he repeated the order thathad already once been given in detail: "and tell the hussars that theyare to cross last and to fire the bridge as I ordered; and theinflammable material on the bridge must be reinspected.""Very good," answered Nesvitski.He called the Cossack with his horse, told him to put away the knapsackand flask, and swung his heavy person easily into the saddle."I'll really call in on the nuns," he said to the officers who watchedhim smilingly, and he rode off by the winding path down the hill."Now then, let's see how far it will carry, Captain. Just try!" said thegeneral, turning to an artillery officer. "Have a little fun to pass thetime.""Crew, to your guns!" commanded the officer.In a moment the men came running gaily from their campfires and beganloading."One!" came the command.Number one jumped briskly aside. The gun rang out with a deafeningmetallic roar, and a whistling grenade flew above the heads of ourtroops below the hill and fell far short of the enemy, a little smokeshowing the spot where it burst.The faces of officers and men brightened up at the sound. Everyone gotup and began watching the movements of our troops below, as plainlyvisible as if but a stone's throw away, and the movements of theapproaching enemy farther off. At the same instant the sun came fullyout from behind the clouds, and the clear sound of the solitary shot andthe brilliance of the bright sunshine merged in a single joyous andspirited impression.CHAPTER VIITwo of the enemy's shots had already flown across the bridge, wherethere was a crush. Halfway across stood Prince Nesvitski, who hadalighted from his horse and whose big body was jammed against therailings. He looked back laughing to the Cossack who stood a few stepsbehind him holding two horses by their bridles. Each time PrinceNesvitski tried to move on, soldiers and carts pushed him back again andpressed him against the railings, and all he could do was to smile."What a fine fellow you are, friend!" said the Cossack to a convoysoldier with a wagon, who was pressing onto the infantrymen who werecrowded together close to his wheels and his horses. "What a fellow! Youcan't wait a moment! Don't you see the general wants to pass?"But the convoyman took no notice of the word "general" and shouted atthe soldiers who were blocking his way. "Hi there, boys! Keep to theleft! Wait a bit." But the soldiers, crowded together shoulder toshoulder, their bayonets interlocking, moved over the bridge in a densemass. Looking down over the rails Prince Nesvitski saw the rapid, noisylittle waves of the Enns, which rippling and eddying round the piles ofthe bridge chased each other along. Looking on the bridge he saw equallyuniform living waves of soldiers, shoulder straps, covered shakos,knapsacks, bayonets, long muskets, and, under the shakos, faces withbroad cheekbones, sunken cheeks, and listless tired expressions, andfeet that moved through the sticky mud that covered the planks of thebridge. Sometimes through the monotonous waves of men, like a fleck ofwhite foam on the waves of the Enns, an officer, in a cloak and with atype of face different from that of the men, squeezed his way along;sometimes like a chip of wood whirling in the river, an hussar on foot,an orderly, or a townsman was carried through the waves of infantry; andsometimes like a log floating down the river, an officers' or company'sbaggage wagon, piled high, leather covered, and hemmed in on all sides,moved across the bridge."It's as if a dam had burst," said the Cossack hopelessly. "Are theremany more of you to come?""A million all but one!" replied a waggish soldier in a torn coat, witha wink, and passed on followed by another, an old man."If he" (he meant the enemy) "begins popping at the bridge now," saidthe old soldier dismally to a comrade, "you'll forget to scratchyourself."That soldier passed on, and after him came another sitting on a cart."Where the devil have the leg bands been shoved to?" said an orderly,running behind the cart and fumbling in the back of it.And he also passed on with the wagon. Then came some merry soldiers whohad evidently been drinking."And then, old fellow, he gives him one in the teeth with the butt endof his gun..." a soldier whose greatcoat was well tucked up said gaily,with a wide swing of his arm."Yes, the ham was just delicious..." answered another with a loud laugh.And they, too, passed on, so that Nesvitski did not learn who had beenstruck on the teeth, or what the ham had to do with it."Bah! How they scurry. He just sends a ball and they think they'll allbe killed," a sergeant was saying angrily and reproachfully."As it flies past me, Daddy, the ball I mean," said a young soldier withan enormous mouth, hardly refraining from laughing, "I felt like dyingof fright. I did, 'pon my word, I got that frightened!" said he, as ifbragging of having been frightened.That one also passed. Then followed a cart unlike any that had gonebefore. It was a German cart with a pair of horses led by a German, andseemed loaded with a whole houseful of effects. A fine brindled cow witha large udder was attached to the cart behind. A woman with an unweanedbaby, an old woman, and a healthy German girl with bright red cheekswere sitting on some feather beds. Evidently these fugitives wereallowed to pass by special permission. The eyes of all the soldiersturned toward the women, and while the vehicle was passing at foot paceall the soldiers' remarks related to the two young ones. Every face borealmost the same smile, expressing unseemly thoughts about the women."Just see, the German sausage is making tracks, too!""Sell me the missis," said another soldier, addressing the German, who,angry and frightened, strode energetically along with downcast eyes."See how smart she's made herself! Oh, the devils!""There, Fedotov, you should be quartered on them!""I have seen as much before now, mate!""Where are you going?" asked an infantry officer who was eating anapple, also half smiling as he looked at the handsome girl.The German closed his eyes, signifying that he did not understand."Take it if you like," said the officer, giving the girl an apple.The girl smiled and took it. Nesvitski like the rest of the men on thebridge did not take his eyes off the women till they had passed. Whenthey had gone by, the same stream of soldiers followed, with the samekind of talk, and at last all stopped. As often happens, the horses of aconvoy wagon became restive at the end of the bridge, and the wholecrowd had to wait."And why are they stopping? There's no proper order!" said the soldiers."Where are you shoving to? Devil take you! Can't you wait? It'll beworse if he fires the bridge. See, here's an officer jammed in too"--different voices were saying in the crowd, as the men looked at oneanother, and all pressed toward the exit from the bridge.Looking down at the waters of the Enns under the bridge, Nesvitskisuddenly heard a sound new to him, of something swiftly approaching...something big, that splashed into the water."Just see where it carries to!" a soldier near by said sternly, lookinground at the sound."Encouraging us to get along quicker," said another uneasily.The crowd moved on again. Nesvitski realized that it was a cannon ball."Hey, Cossack, my horse!" he said. "Now, then, you there! get out of theway! Make way!"With great difficulty he managed to get to his horse, and shoutingcontinually he moved on. The soldiers squeezed themselves to make wayfor him, but again pressed on him so that they jammed his leg, and thosenearest him were not to blame for they were themselves pressed stillharder from behind."Nesvitski, Nesvitski! you numskull!" came a hoarse voice from behindhim.Nesvitski looked round and saw, some fifteen paces away but separated bythe living mass of moving infantry, Vaska Denisov, red and shaggy, withhis cap on the back of his black head and a cloak hanging jauntily overhis shoulder."Tell these devils, these fiends, to let me pass!" shouted Denisovevidently in a fit of rage, his coal-black eyes with their bloodshotwhites glittering and rolling as he waved his sheathed saber in a smallbare hand as red as his face."Ah, Vaska!" joyfully replied Nesvitski. "What's up with you?""The squadwon can't pass," shouted Vaska Denisov, showing his whiteteeth fiercely and spurring his black thoroughbred Arab, which twitchedits ears as the bayonets touched it, and snorted, spurting white foamfrom his bit, tramping the planks of the bridge with his hoofs, andapparently ready to jump over the railings had his rider let him. "Whatis this? They're like sheep! Just like sheep! Out of the way!... Let uspass!... Stop there, you devil with the cart! I'll hack you with mysaber!" he shouted, actually drawing his saber from its scabbard andflourishing it.The soldiers crowded against one another with terrified faces, andDenisov joined Nesvitski."How's it you're not drunk today?" said Nesvitski when the other hadridden up to him."They don't even give one time to dwink!" answered Vaska Denisov. "Theykeep dwagging the wegiment to and fwo all day. If they mean to fight,let's fight. But the devil knows what this is.""What a dandy you are today!" said Nesvitski, looking at Denisov's newcloak and saddlecloth.Denisov smiled, took out of his sabretache a handkerchief that diffuseda smell of perfume, and put it to Nesvitski's nose."Of course. I'm going into action! I've shaved, bwushed my teeth, andscented myself."The imposing figure of Nesvitski followed by his Cossack, and thedetermination of Denisov who flourished his sword and shoutedfrantically, had such an effect that they managed to squeeze through tothe farther side of the bridge and stopped the infantry. Beside thebridge Nesvitski found the colonel to whom he had to deliver the order,and having done this he rode back.Having cleared the way Denisov stopped at the end of the bridge.Carelessly holding in his stallion that was neighing and pawing theground, eager to rejoin its fellows, he watched his squadron drawnearer. Then the clang of hoofs, as of several horses galloping,resounded on the planks of the bridge, and the squadron, officers infront and men four abreast, spread across the bridge and began to emergeon his side of it.The infantry who had been stopped crowded near the bridge in thetrampled mud and gazed with that particular feeling of ill-will,estrangement, and ridicule with which troops of different arms usuallyencounter one another at the clean, smart hussars who moved past them inregular order."Smart lads! Only fit for a fair!" said one."What good are they? They're led about just for show!" remarked another."Don't kick up the dust, you infantry!" jested an hussar whose prancinghorse had splashed mud over some foot soldiers."I'd like to put you on a two days' march with a knapsack! Your finecords would soon get a bit rubbed," said an infantryman, wiping the mudoff his face with his sleeve. "Perched up there, you're more like a birdthan a man.""There now, Zikin, they ought to put you on a horse. You'd look fine,"said a corporal, chaffing a thin little soldier who bent under theweight of his knapsack."Take a stick between your legs, that'll suit you for a horse!" thehussar shouted back.CHAPTER VIIIThe last of the infantry hurriedly crossed the bridge, squeezingtogether as they approached it as if passing through a funnel. At lastthe baggage wagons had all crossed, the crush was less, and the lastbattalion came onto the bridge. Only Denisov's squadron of hussarsremained on the farther side of the bridge facing the enemy, who couldbe seen from the hill on the opposite bank but was not yet visible fromthe bridge, for the horizon as seen from the valley through which theriver flowed was formed by the rising ground only half a mile away. Atthe foot of the hill lay wasteland over which a few groups of ourCossack scouts were moving. Suddenly on the road at the top of the highground, artillery and troops in blue uniform were seen. These were theFrench. A group of Cossack scouts retired down the hill at a trot. Allthe officers and men of Denisov's squadron, though they tried to talk ofother things and to look in other directions, thought only of what wasthere on the hilltop, and kept constantly looking at the patchesappearing on the skyline, which they knew to be the enemy's troops. Theweather had cleared again since noon and the sun was descending brightlyupon the Danube and the dark hills around it. It was calm, and atintervals the bugle calls and the shouts of the enemy could be heardfrom the hill. There was no one now between the squadron and the enemyexcept a few scattered skirmishers. An empty space of some seven hundredyards was all that separated them. The enemy ceased firing, and thatstern, threatening, inaccessible, and intangible line which separatestwo hostile armies was all the more clearly felt."One step beyond that boundary line which resembles the line dividingthe living from the dead lies uncertainty, suffering, and death. Andwhat is there? Who is there?--there beyond that field, that tree, thatroof lit up by the sun? No one knows, but one wants to know. You fearand yet long to cross that line, and know that sooner or later it mustbe crossed and you will have to find out what is there, just as you willinevitably have to learn what lies the other side of death. But you arestrong, healthy, cheerful, and excited, and are surrounded by other suchexcitedly animated and healthy men." So thinks, or at any rate feels,anyone who comes in sight of the enemy, and that feeling gives aparticular glamour and glad keenness of impression to everything thattakes place at such moments.On the high ground where the enemy was, the smoke of a cannon rose, anda ball flew whistling over the heads of the hussar squadron. Theofficers who had been standing together rode off to their places. Thehussars began carefully aligning their horses. Silence fell on the wholesquadron. All were looking at the enemy in front and at the squadroncommander, awaiting the word of command. A second and a third cannonball flew past. Evidently they were firing at the hussars, but the ballswith rapid rhythmic whistle flew over the heads of the horsemen and fellsomewhere beyond them. The hussars did not look round, but at the soundof each shot, as at the word of command, the whole squadron with itsrows of faces so alike yet so different, holding its breath while theball flew past, rose in the stirrups and sank back again. The soldierswithout turning their heads glanced at one another, curious to see theircomrades' impression. Every face, from Denisov's to that of the bugler,showed one common expression of conflict, irritation, and excitement,around chin and mouth. The quartermaster frowned, looking at thesoldiers as if threatening to punish them. Cadet Mironov ducked everytime a ball flew past. Rostov on the left flank, mounted on his Rook--ahandsome horse despite its game leg--had the happy air of a schoolboycalled up before a large audience for an examination in which he feelssure he will distinguish himself. He was glancing at everyone with aclear, bright expression, as if asking them to notice how calmly he satunder fire. But despite himself, on his face too that same indication ofsomething new and stern showed round the mouth."Who's that curtseying there? Cadet Miwonov! That's not wight! Look atme," cried Denisov who, unable to keep still on one spot, kept turninghis horse in front of the squadron.The black, hairy, snub-nosed face of Vaska Denisov, and his whole shortsturdy figure with the sinewy hairy hand and stumpy fingers in which heheld the hilt of his naked saber, looked just as it usually did,especially toward evening when he had emptied his second bottle; he wasonly redder than usual. With his shaggy head thrown back like birds whenthey drink, pressing his spurs mercilessly into the sides of his goodhorse, Bedouin, and sitting as though falling backwards in the saddle,he galloped to the other flank of the squadron and shouted in a hoarsevoice to the men to look to their pistols. He rode up to Kirsten. Thestaff captain on his broad-backed, steady mare came at a walk to meethim. His face with its long mustache was serious as always, only hiseyes were brighter than usual."Well, what about it?" said he to Denisov. "It won't come to a fight.You'll see--we shall retire.""The devil only knows what they're about!" muttered Denisov. "Ah,Wostov," he cried noticing the cadet's bright face, "you've got it atlast."And he smiled approvingly, evidently pleased with the cadet. Rostov feltperfectly happy. Just then the commander appeared on the bridge. Denisovgalloped up to him."Your excellency! Let us attack them! I'll dwive them off.""Attack indeed!" said the colonel in a bored voice, puckering up hisface as if driving off a troublesome fly. "And why are you stoppinghere? Don't you see the skirmishers are retreating? Lead the squadronback."The squadron crossed the bridge and drew out of range of fire withouthaving lost a single man. The second squadron that had been in the frontline followed them across and the last Cossacks quitted the farther sideof the river.The two Pavlograd squadrons, having crossed the bridge, retired up thehill one after the other. Their colonel, Karl Bogdanich Schubert, cameup to Denisov's squadron and rode at a footpace not far from Rostov,without taking any notice of him although they were now meeting for thefirst time since their encounter concerning Telyanin. Rostov, feelingthat he was at the front and in the power of a man toward whom he nowadmitted that he had been to blame, did not lift his eyes from thecolonel's athletic back, his nape covered with light hair, and his redneck. It seemed to Rostov that Bogdanich was only pretending not tonotice him, and that his whole aim now was to test the cadet's courage,so he drew himself up and looked around him merrily; then it seemed tohim that Bogdanich rode so near in order to show him his courage. Nexthe thought that his enemy would send the squadron on a desperate attackjust to punish him--Rostov. Then he imagined how, after the attack,Bogdanich would come up to him as he lay wounded and would magnanimouslyextend the hand of reconciliation.The high-shouldered figure of Zherkov, familiar to the Pavlograds as hehad but recently left their regiment, rode up to the colonel. After hisdismissal from headquarters Zherkov had not remained in the regiment,saying he was not such a fool as to slave at the front when he could getmore rewards by doing nothing on the staff, and had succeeded inattaching himself as an orderly officer to Prince Bagration. He now cameto his former chief with an order from the commander of the rear guard."Colonel," he said, addressing Rostov's enemy with an air of gloomygravity and glancing round at his comrades, "there is an order to stopand fire the bridge.""An order to who?" asked the colonel morosely."I don't myself know 'to who,'" replied the cornet in a serious tone,"but the prince told me to 'go and tell the colonel that the hussarsmust return quickly and fire the bridge.'"Zherkov was followed by an officer of the suite who rode up to thecolonel of hussars with the same order. After him the stout Nesvitskicame galloping up on a Cossack horse that could scarcely carry hisweight."How's this, Colonel?" he shouted as he approached. "I told you to firethe bridge, and now someone has gone and blundered; they are all besidethemselves over there and one can't make anything out."The colonel deliberately stopped the regiment and turned to Nesvitski."You spoke to me of inflammable material," said he, "but you saidnothing about firing it.""But, my dear sir," said Nesvitski as he drew up, taking off his cap andsmoothing his hair wet with perspiration with his plump hand, "wasn't Itelling you to fire the bridge, when inflammable material had been putin position?""I am not your 'dear sir,' Mr. Staff Officer, and you did not tell me toburn the bridge! I know the service, and it is my habit orders strictlyto obey. You said the bridge would be burned, but who would it burn, Icould not know by the holy spirit!""Ah, that's always the way!" said Nesvitski with a wave of the hand."How did you get here?" said he, turning to Zherkov."On the same business. But you are damp! Let me wring you out!""You were saying, Mr. Staff Officer..." continued the colonel in anoffended tone."Colonel," interrupted the officer of the suite, "You must be quick orthe enemy will bring up his guns to use grapeshot."The colonel looked silently at the officer of the suite, at the stoutstaff officer, and at Zherkov, and he frowned."I will the bridge fire," he said in a solemn tone as if to announcethat in spite of all the unpleasantness he had to endure he would stilldo the right thing.Striking his horse with his long muscular legs as if it were to blamefor everything, the colonel moved forward and ordered the secondsquadron, that in which Rostov was serving under Denisov, to return tothe bridge."There, it's just as I thought," said Rostov to himself. "He wishes totest me!" His heart contracted and the blood rushed to his face. "Lethim see whether I am a coward!" he thought.Again on all the bright faces of the squadron the serious expressionappeared that they had worn when under fire. Rostov watched his enemy,the colonel, closely--to find in his face confirmation of his ownconjecture, but the colonel did not once glance at Rostov, and looked ashe always did when at the front, solemn and stern. Then came the word ofcommand."Look sharp! Look sharp!" several voices repeated around him.Their sabers catching in the bridles and their spurs jingling, thehussars hastily dismounted, not knowing what they were to do. The menwere crossing themselves. Rostov no longer looked at the colonel, he hadno time. He was afraid of falling behind the hussars, so much afraidthat his heart stood still. His hand trembled as he gave his horse intoan orderly's charge, and he felt the blood rush to his heart with athud. Denisov rode past him, leaning back and shouting something. Rostovsaw nothing but the hussars running all around him, their spurs catchingand their sabers clattering."Stretchers!" shouted someone behind him.Rostov did not think what this call for stretchers meant; he ran on,trying only to be ahead of the others; but just at the bridge, notlooking at the ground, he came on some sticky, trodden mud, stumbled,and fell on his hands. The others outstripped him."At boss zides, Captain," he heard the voice of the colonel, who, havingridden ahead, had pulled up his horse near the bridge, with atriumphant, cheerful face.Rostov wiping his muddy hands on his breeches looked at his enemy andwas about to run on, thinking that the farther he went to the front thebetter. But Bogdanich, without looking at or recognizing Rostov, shoutedto him:"Who's that running on the middle of the bridge? To the right! Comeback, Cadet!" he cried angrily; and turning to Denisov, who, showing offhis courage, had ridden on to the planks of the bridge:"Why run risks, Captain? You should dismount," he said."Oh, every bullet has its billet," answered Vaska Denisov, turning inhis saddle.Meanwhile Nesvitski, Zherkov, and the officer of the suite were standingtogether out of range of the shots, watching, now the small group of menwith yellow shakos, dark-green jackets braided with cord, and blueriding breeches, who were swarming near the bridge, and then at what wasapproaching in the distance from the opposite side--the blue uniformsand groups with horses, easily recognizable as artillery."Will they burn the bridge or not? Who'll get there first? Will they getthere and fire the bridge or will the French get within grapeshot rangeand wipe them out?" These were the questions each man of the troops onthe high ground above the bridge involuntarily asked himself with asinking heart--watching the bridge and the hussars in the bright eveninglight and the blue tunics advancing from the other side with theirbayonets and guns."Ugh. The hussars will get it hot!" said Nesvitski; "they are withingrapeshot range now.""He shouldn't have taken so many men," said the officer of the suite."True enough," answered Nesvitski; "two smart fellows could have donethe job just as well.""Ah, your excellency," put in Zherkov, his eyes fixed on the hussars,but still with that naive air that made it impossible to know whether hewas speaking in jest or in earnest. "Ah, your excellency! How you lookat things! Send two men? And who then would give us the Vladimir medaland ribbon? But now, even if they do get peppered, the squadron may berecommended for honors and he may get a ribbon. Our Bogdanich knows howthings are done.""There now!" said the officer of the suite, "that's grapeshot."He pointed to the French guns, the limbers of which were being detachedand hurriedly removed.On the French side, amid the groups with cannon, a cloud of smokeappeared, then a second and a third almost simultaneously, and at themoment when the first report was heard a fourth was seen. Then tworeports one after another, and a third."Oh! Oh!" groaned Nesvitski as if in fierce pain, seizing the officer ofthe suite by the arm. "Look! A man has fallen! Fallen, fallen!""Two, I think.""If I were Tsar I would never go to war," said Nesvitski, turning away.The French guns were hastily reloaded. The infantry in their blueuniforms advanced toward the bridge at a run. Smoke appeared again butat irregular intervals, and grapeshot cracked and rattled onto thebridge. But this time Nesvitski could not see what was happening there,as a dense cloud of smoke arose from it. The hussars had succeeded insetting it on fire and the French batteries were now firing at them, nolonger to hinder them but because the guns were trained and there wassomeone to fire at.The French had time to fire three rounds of grapeshot before the hussarsgot back to their horses. Two were misdirected and the shot went toohigh, but the last round fell in the midst of a group of hussars andknocked three of them over.Rostov, absorbed by his relations with Bogdanich, had paused on thebridge not knowing what to do. There was no one to hew down (as he hadalways imagined battles to himself), nor could he help to fire thebridge because he had not brought any burning straw with him like theother soldiers. He stood looking about him, when suddenly he heard arattle on the bridge as if nuts were being spilt, and the hussar nearestto him fell against the rails with a groan. Rostov ran up to him withthe others. Again someone shouted, "Stretchers!" Four men seized thehussar and began lifting him."Oooh! For Christ's sake let me alone!" cried the wounded man, but stillhe was lifted and laid on the stretcher.Nicholas Rostov turned away and, as if searching for something, gazedinto the distance, at the waters of the Danube, at the sky, and at thesun. How beautiful the sky looked; how blue, how calm, and how deep! Howbright and glorious was the setting sun! With what soft glitter thewaters of the distant Danube shone. And fairer still were the farawayblue mountains beyond the river, the nunnery, the mysterious gorges, andthe pine forests veiled in the mist of their summits... There was peaceand happiness... "I should wish for nothing else, nothing, if only Iwere there," thought Rostov. "In myself alone and in that sunshine thereis so much happiness; but here... groans, suffering, fear, and thisuncertainty and hurry... There--they are shouting again, and again areall running back somewhere, and I shall run with them, and it, death, ishere above me and around... Another instant and I shall never again seethe sun, this water, that gorge!..."At that instant the sun began to hide behind the clouds, and otherstretchers came into view before Rostov. And the fear of death and ofthe stretchers, and love of the sun and of life, all merged into onefeeling of sickening agitation."O Lord God! Thou who art in that heaven, save, forgive, and protectme!" Rostov whispered.The hussars ran back to the men who held their horses; their voicessounded louder and calmer, the stretchers disappeared from sight."Well, fwiend? So you've smelt powdah!" shouted Vaska Denisov just abovehis ear."It's all over; but I am a coward--yes, a coward!" thought Rostov, andsighing deeply he took Rook, his horse, which stood resting one foot,from the orderly and began to mount."Was that grapeshot?" he asked Denisov."Yes and no mistake!" cried Denisov. "You worked like wegular bwicks andit's nasty work! An attack's pleasant work! Hacking away at the dogs!But this sort of thing is the very devil, with them shooting at you likea target."And Denisov rode up to a group that had stopped near Rostov, composed ofthe colonel, Nesvitski, Zherkov, and the officer from the suite."Well, it seems that no one has noticed," thought Rostov. And this wastrue. No one had taken any notice, for everyone knew the sensation whichthe cadet under fire for the first time had experienced."Here's something for you to report," said Zherkov. "See if I don't getpromoted to a sublieutenancy.""Inform the prince that I the bridge fired!" said the coloneltriumphantly and gaily."And if he asks about the losses?""A trifle," said the colonel in his bass voice: "two hussars wounded,and one knocked out," he added, unable to restrain a happy smile, andpronouncing the phrase "knocked out" with ringing distinctness.CHAPTER IXPursued by the French army of a hundred thousand men under the commandof Bonaparte, encountering a population that was unfriendly to it,losing confidence in its allies, suffering from shortness of supplies,and compelled to act under conditions of war unlike anything that hadbeen foreseen, the Russian army of thirty-five thousand men commanded byKutuzov was hurriedly retreating along the Danube, stopping whereovertaken by the enemy and fighting rearguard actions only as far asnecessary to enable it to retreat without losing its heavy equipment.There had been actions at Lambach, Amstetten, and Melk; but despite thecourage and endurance--acknowledged even by the enemy--with which theRussians fought, the only consequence of these actions was a yet morerapid retreat. Austrian troops that had escaped capture at Ulm and hadjoined Kutuzov at Braunau now separated from the Russian army, andKutuzov was left with only his own weak and exhausted forces. Thedefense of Vienna was no longer to be thought of. Instead of anoffensive, the plan of which, carefully prepared in accord with themodern science of strategics, had been handed to Kutuzov when he was inVienna by the Austrian Hofkriegsrath, the sole and almost unattainableaim remaining for him was to effect a junction with the forces that wereadvancing from Russia, without losing his army as Mack had done at Ulm.On the twenty-eighth of October Kutuzov with his army crossed to theleft bank of the Danube and took up a position for the first time withthe river between himself and the main body of the French. On thethirtieth he attacked Mortier's division, which was on the left bank,and broke it up. In this action for the first time trophies were taken:banners, cannon, and two enemy generals. For the first time, after afortnight's retreat, the Russian troops had halted and after a fight hadnot only held the field but had repulsed the French. Though the troopswere ill-clad, exhausted, and had lost a third of their number inkilled, wounded, sick, and stragglers; though a number of sick andwounded had been abandoned on the other side of the Danube with a letterin which Kutuzov entrusted them to the humanity of the enemy; and thoughthe big hospitals and the houses in Krems converted into militaryhospitals could no longer accommodate all the sick and wounded, yet thestand made at Krems and the victory over Mortier raised the spirits ofthe army considerably. Throughout the whole army and at headquartersmost joyful though erroneous rumors were rife of the imaginary approachof columns from Russia, of some victory gained by the Austrians, and ofthe retreat of the frightened Bonaparte.Prince Andrew during the battle had been in attendance on the AustrianGeneral Schmidt, who was killed in the action. His horse had beenwounded under him and his own arm slightly grazed by a bullet. As a markof the commander-in-chief's special favor he was sent with the news ofthis victory to the Austrian court, now no longer at Vienna (which wasthreatened by the French) but at Brunn. Despite his apparently delicatebuild Prince Andrew could endure physical fatigue far better than manyvery muscular men, and on the night of the battle, having arrived atKrems excited but not weary, with dispatches from Dokhturov to Kutuzov,he was sent immediately with a special dispatch to Brunn. To be so sentmeant not only a reward but an important step toward promotion.The night was dark but starry, the road showed black in the snow thathad fallen the previous day--the day of the battle. Reviewing hisimpressions of the recent battle, picturing pleasantly to himself theimpression his news of a victory would create, or recalling the send-offgiven him by the commander-in-chief and his fellow officers, PrinceAndrew was galloping along in a post chaise enjoying the feelings of aman who has at length begun to attain a long-desired happiness. As soonas he closed his eyes his ears seemed filled with the rattle of thewheels and the sensation of victory. Then he began to imagine that theRussians were running away and that he himself was killed, but hequickly roused himself with a feeling of joy, as if learning afresh thatthis was not so but that on the contrary the French had run away. Heagain recalled all the details of the victory and his own calm courageduring the battle, and feeling reassured he dozed off.... The darkstarry night was followed by a bright cheerful morning. The snow wasthawing in the sunshine, the horses galloped quickly, and on both sidesof the road were forests of different kinds, fields, and villages.At one of the post stations he overtook a convoy of Russian wounded. TheRussian officer in charge of the transport lolled back in the frontcart, shouting and scolding a soldier with coarse abuse. In each of thelong German carts six or more pale, dirty, bandaged men were beingjolted over the stony road. Some of them were talking (he heard Russianwords), others were eating bread; the more severely wounded lookedsilently, with the languid interest of sick children, at the envoyhurrying past them.Prince Andrew told his driver to stop, and asked a soldier in whataction they had been wounded. "Day before yesterday, on the Danube,"answered the soldier. Prince Andrew took out his purse and gave thesoldier three gold pieces."That's for them all," he said to the officer who came up."Get well soon, lads!" he continued, turning to the soldiers. "There'splenty to do still.""What news, sir?" asked the officer, evidently anxious to start aconversation."Good news!... Go on!" he shouted to the driver, and they galloped on.It was already quite dark when Prince Andrew rattled over the pavedstreets of Brunn and found himself surrounded by high buildings, thelights of shops, houses, and street lamps, fine carriages, and all thatatmosphere of a large and active town which is always so attractive to asoldier after camp life. Despite his rapid journey and sleepless night,Prince Andrew when he drove up to the palace felt even more vigorous andalert than he had done the day before. Only his eyes gleamed feverishlyand his thoughts followed one another with extraordinary clearness andrapidity. He again vividly recalled the details of the battle, no longerdim, but definite and in the concise form in which he imagined himselfstating them to the Emperor Francis. He vividly imagined the casualquestions that might be put to him and the answers he would give. Heexpected to be at once presented to the Emperor. At the chief entranceto the palace, however, an official came running out to meet him, andlearning that he was a special messenger led him to another entrance."To the right from the corridor, Euer Hochgeboren! There you will findthe adjutant on duty," said the official. "He will conduct you to theMinister of War."The adjutant on duty, meeting Prince Andrew, asked him to wait, and wentin to the Minister of War. Five minutes later he returned and bowingwith particular courtesy ushered Prince Andrew before him along acorridor to the cabinet where the Minister of War was at work. Theadjutant by his elaborate courtesy appeared to wish to ward off anyattempt at familiarity on the part of the Russian messenger.Prince Andrew's joyous feeling was considerably weakened as heapproached the door of the minister's room. He felt offended, andwithout his noticing it the feeling of offense immediately turned intoone of disdain which was quite uncalled for. His fertile mind instantlysuggested to him a point of view which gave him a right to despise theadjutant and the minister. "Away from the smell of powder, they probablythink it easy to gain victories!" he thought. His eyes narroweddisdainfully, he entered the room of the Minister of War with peculiarlydeliberate steps. This feeling of disdain was heightened when he saw theminister seated at a large table reading some papers and making pencilnotes on them, and for the first two or three minutes taking no noticeof his arrival. A wax candle stood at each side of the minister's bentbald head with its gray temples. He went on reading to the end, withoutraising his eyes at the opening of the door and the sound of footsteps."Take this and deliver it," said he to his adjutant, handing him thepapers and still taking no notice of the special messenger.Prince Andrew felt that either the actions of Kutuzov's army interestedthe Minister of War less than any of the other matters he was concernedwith, or he wanted to give the Russian special messenger thatimpression. "But that is a matter of perfect indifference to me," hethought. The minister drew the remaining papers together, arranged themevenly, and then raised his head. He had an intellectual and distinctivehead, but the instant he turned to Prince Andrew the firm, intelligentexpression on his face changed in a way evidently deliberate andhabitual to him. His face took on the stupid artificial smile (whichdoes not even attempt to hide its artificiality) of a man who iscontinually receiving many petitioners one after another."From General Field Marshal Kutuzov?" he asked. "I hope it is good news?There has been an encounter with Mortier? A victory? It was high time!"He took the dispatch which was addressed to him and began to read itwith a mournful expression."Oh, my God! My God! Schmidt!" he exclaimed in German. "What a calamity!What a calamity!"Having glanced through the dispatch he laid it on the table and lookedat Prince Andrew, evidently considering something."Ah what a calamity! You say the affair was decisive? But Mortier is notcaptured." Again he pondered. "I am very glad you have brought goodnews, though Schmidt's death is a heavy price to pay for the victory.His Majesty will no doubt wish to see you, but not today. I thank you!You must have a rest. Be at the levee tomorrow after the parade.However, I will let you know."The stupid smile, which had left his face while he was speaking,reappeared."Au revoir! Thank you very much. His Majesty will probably desire to seeyou," he added, bowing his head.When Prince Andrew left the palace he felt that all the interest andhappiness the victory had afforded him had been now left in theindifferent hands of the Minister of War and the polite adjutant. Thewhole tenor of his thoughts instantaneously changed; the battle seemedthe memory of a remote event long past.CHAPTER XPrince Andrew stayed at Brunn with Bilibin, a Russian acquaintance ofhis in the diplomatic service."Ah, my dear prince! I could not have a more welcome visitor," saidBilibin as he came out to meet Prince Andrew. "Franz, put the prince'sthings in my bedroom," said he to the servant who was ushering Bolkonskiin. "So you're a messenger of victory, eh? Splendid! And I am sittinghere ill, as you see."After washing and dressing, Prince Andrew came into the diplomat'sluxurious study and sat down to the dinner prepared for him. Bilibinsettled down comfortably beside the fire.After his journey and the campaign during which he had been deprived ofall the comforts of cleanliness and all the refinements of life, PrinceAndrew felt a pleasant sense of repose among luxurious surroundings suchas he had been accustomed to from childhood. Besides it was pleasant,after his reception by the Austrians, to speak if not in Russian (forthey were speaking French) at least with a Russian who would, hesupposed, share the general Russian antipathy to the Austrians which wasthen particularly strong.Bilibin was a man of thirty-five, a bachelor, and of the same circle asPrince Andrew. They had known each other previously in Petersburg, buthad become more intimate when Prince Andrew was in Vienna with Kutuzov.Just as Prince Andrew was a young man who gave promise of rising high inthe military profession, so to an even greater extent Bilibin gavepromise of rising in his diplomatic career. He still a young man but nolonger a young diplomat, as he had entered the service at the age ofsixteen, had been in Paris and Copenhagen, and now held a ratherimportant post in Vienna. Both the foreign minister and our ambassadorin Vienna knew him and valued him. He was not one of those manydiplomats who are esteemed because they have certain negative qualities,avoid doing certain things, and speak French. He was one of those, who,liking work, knew how to do it, and despite his indolence wouldsometimes spend a whole night at his writing table. He worked wellwhatever the import of his work. It was not the question "What for?" butthe question "How?" that interested him. What the diplomatic mattermight be he did not care, but it gave him great pleasure to prepare acircular, memorandum, or report, skillfully, pointedly, and elegantly.Bilibin's services were valued not only for what he wrote, but also forhis skill in dealing and conversing with those in the highest spheres.Bilibin liked conversation as he liked work, only when it could be madeelegantly witty. In society he always awaited an opportunity to saysomething striking and took part in a conversation only when that waspossible. His conversation was always sprinkled with wittily original,finished phrases of general interest. These sayings were prepared in theinner laboratory of his mind in a portable form as if intentionally, sothat insignificant society people might carry them from drawing room todrawing room. And, in fact, Bilibin's witticisms were hawked about inthe Viennese drawing rooms and often had an influence on mattersconsidered important.His thin, worn, sallow face was covered with deep wrinkles, which alwayslooked as clean and well washed as the tips of one's fingers after aRussian bath. The movement of these wrinkles formed the principal playof expression on his face. Now his forehead would pucker into deep foldsand his eyebrows were lifted, then his eyebrows would descend and deepwrinkles would crease his cheeks. His small, deep-set eyes alwaystwinkled and looked out straight."Well, now tell me about your exploits," said he.Bolkonski, very modestly without once mentioning himself, described theengagement and his reception by the Minister of War."They received me and my news as one receives a dog in a game ofskittles," said he in conclusion.Bilibin smiled and the wrinkles on his face disappeared."Cependant, mon cher," he remarked, examining his nails from a distanceand puckering the skin above his left eye, "malgre la haute estime queje professe pour the Orthodox Russian army, j'avoue que votre victoiren'est pas des plus victorieuses." ** "But my dear fellow, with all my respect for the Orthodox Russianarmy, I must say that your victory was not particularly victorious."He went on talking in this way in French, uttering only those words inRussian on which he wished to put a contemptuous emphasis."Come now! You with all your forces fall on the unfortunate Mortier andhis one division, and even then Mortier slips through your fingers!Where's the victory?""But seriously," said Prince Andrew, "we can at any rate say withoutboasting that it was a little better than at Ulm...""Why didn't you capture one, just one, marshal for us?""Because not everything happens as one expects or with the smoothness ofa parade. We had expected, as I told you, to get at their rear by sevenin the morning but had not reached it by five in the afternoon.""And why didn't you do it at seven in the morning? You ought to havebeen there at seven in the morning," returned Bilibin with a smile. "Youought to have been there at seven in the morning.""Why did you not succeed in impressing on Bonaparte by diplomaticmethods that he had better leave Genoa alone?" retorted Prince Andrew inthe same tone."I know," interrupted Bilibin, "you're thinking it's very easy to takemarshals, sitting on a sofa by the fire! That is true, but still whydidn't you capture him? So don't be surprised if not only the Ministerof War but also his Most August Majesty the Emperor and King Francis isnot much delighted by your victory. Even I, a poor secretary of theRussian Embassy, do not feel any need in token of my joy to give myFranz a thaler, or let him go with his Liebchen to the Prater... True,we have no Prater here..."He looked straight at Prince Andrew and suddenly unwrinkled hisforehead."It is now my turn to ask you 'why?' mon cher," said Bolkonski. "Iconfess I do not understand: perhaps there are diplomatic subtletieshere beyond my feeble intelligence, but I can't make it out. Mack losesa whole army, the Archduke Ferdinand and the Archduke Karl give no signsof life and make blunder after blunder. Kutuzov alone at last gains areal victory, destroying the spell of the invincibility of the French,and the Minister of War does not even care to hear the details.""That's just it, my dear fellow. You see it's hurrah for the Tsar, forRussia, for the Orthodox Greek faith! All that is beautiful, but what dowe, I mean the Austrian court, care for your victories? Bring us nicenews of a victory by the Archduke Karl or Ferdinand (one archduke's asgood as another, as you know) and even if it is only over a fire brigadeof Bonaparte's, that will be another story and we'll fire off somecannon! But this sort of thing seems done on purpose to vex us. TheArchduke Karl does nothing, the Archduke Ferdinand disgraces himself.You abandon Vienna, give up its defense--as much as to say: 'Heaven iswith us, but heaven help you and your capital!' The one general whom weall loved, Schmidt, you expose to a bullet, and then you congratulate uson the victory! Admit that more irritating news than yours could nothave been conceived. It's as if it had been done on purpose, on purpose.Besides, suppose you did gain a brilliant victory, if even the ArchdukeKarl gained a victory, what effect would that have on the general courseof events? It's too late now when Vienna is occupied by the Frencharmy!""What? Occupied? Vienna occupied?""Not only occupied, but Bonaparte is at Schonbrunn, and the count, ourdear Count Vrbna, goes to him for orders."After the fatigues and impressions of the journey, his reception, andespecially after having dined, Bolkonski felt that he could not take inthe full significance of the words he heard."Count Lichtenfels was here this morning," Bilibin continued, "andshowed me a letter in which the parade of the French in Vienna was fullydescribed: Prince Murat et tout le tremblement... You see that yourvictory is not a matter for great rejoicing and that you can't bereceived as a savior.""Really I don't care about that, I don't care at all," said PrinceAndrew, beginning to understand that his news of the battle before Kremswas really of small importance in view of such events as the fall ofAustria's capital. "How is it Vienna was taken? What of the bridge andits celebrated bridgehead and Prince Auersperg? We heard reports thatPrince Auersperg was defending Vienna?" he said."Prince Auersperg is on this, on our side of the river, and is defendingus--doing it very badly, I think, but still he is defending us. ButVienna is on the other side. No, the bridge has not yet been taken and Ihope it will not be, for it is mined and orders have been given to blowit up. Otherwise we should long ago have been in the mountains ofBohemia, and you and your army would have spent a bad quarter of an hourbetween two fires.""But still this does not mean that the campaign is over," said PrinceAndrew."Well, I think it is. The bigwigs here think so too, but they daren'tsay so. It will be as I said at the beginning of the campaign, it won'tbe your skirmishing at Durrenstein, or gunpowder at all, that willdecide the matter, but those who devised it," said Bilibin quoting oneof his own mots, releasing the wrinkles on his forehead, and pausing."The only question is what will come of the meeting between the EmperorAlexander and the King of Prussia in Berlin? If Prussia joins theAllies, Austria's hand will be forced and there will be war. If not itis merely a question of settling where the preliminaries of the newCampo Formio are to be drawn up.""What an extraordinary genius!" Prince Andrew suddenly exclaimed,clenching his small hand and striking the table with it, "and what luckthe man has!""Buonaparte?" said Bilibin inquiringly, puckering up his forehead toindicate that he was about to say something witty. "Buonaparte?" herepeated, accentuating the u: "I think, however, now that he lays downlaws for Austria at Schonbrunn, il faut lui faire grace de l'u! * Ishall certainly adopt an innovation and call him simply Bonaparte!"* "We must let him off the u!""But joking apart," said Prince Andrew, "do you really think thecampaign is over?""This is what I think. Austria has been made a fool of, and she is notused to it. She will retaliate. And she has been fooled in the firstplace because her provinces have been pillaged--they say the HolyRussian army loots terribly--her army is destroyed, her capital taken,and all this for the beaux yeux * of His Sardinian Majesty. Andtherefore--this is between ourselves--I instinctively feel that we arebeing deceived, my instinct tells me of negotiations with France andprojects for peace, a secret peace concluded separately."* Fine eyes."Impossible!" cried Prince Andrew. "That would be too base.""If we live we shall see," replied Bilibin, his face again becomingsmooth as a sign that the conversation was at an end.When Prince Andrew reached the room prepared for him and lay down in aclean shirt on the feather bed with its warmed and fragrant pillows, hefelt that the battle of which he had brought tidings was far, far awayfrom him. The alliance with Prussia, Austria's treachery, Bonaparte'snew triumph, tomorrow's levee and parade, and the audience with theEmperor Francis occupied his thoughts.He closed his eyes, and immediately a sound of cannonading, of musketryand the rattling of carriage wheels seemed to fill his ears, and nowagain drawn out in a thin line the musketeers were descending the hill,the French were firing, and he felt his heart palpitating as he rodeforward beside Schmidt with the bullets merrily whistling all around,and he experienced tenfold the joy of living, as he had not done sincechildhood.He woke up..."Yes, that all happened!" he said, and, smiling happily to himself likea child, he fell into a deep, youthful slumber.CHAPTER XINext day he woke late. Recalling his recent impressions, the firstthought that came into his mind was that today he had to be presented tothe Emperor Francis; he remembered the Minister of War, the politeAustrian adjutant, Bilibin, and last night's conversation. Havingdressed for his attendance at court in full parade uniform, which he hadnot worn for a long time, he went into Bilibin's study fresh, animated,and handsome, with his hand bandaged. In the study were four gentlemenof the diplomatic corps. With Prince Hippolyte Kuragin, who was asecretary to the embassy, Bolkonski was already acquainted. Bilibinintroduced him to the others.The gentlemen assembled at Bilibin's were young, wealthy, gay societymen, who here, as in Vienna, formed a special set which Bilibin, theirleader, called les notres. * This set, consisting almost exclusively ofdiplomats, evidently had its own interests which had nothing to do withwar or politics but related to high society, to certain women, and tothe official side of the service. These gentlemen received Prince Andrewas one of themselves, an honor they did not extend to many. Frompoliteness and to start conversation, they asked him a few questionsabout the army and the battle, and then the talk went off into merryjests and gossip.* Ours."But the best of it was," said one, telling of the misfortune of afellow diplomat, "that the Chancellor told him flatly that hisappointment to London was a promotion and that he was so to regard it.Can you fancy the figure he cut?...""But the worst of it, gentlemen--I am giving Kuragin away to you--isthat that man suffers, and this Don Juan, wicked fellow, is takingadvantage of it!"Prince Hippolyte was lolling in a lounge chair with his legs over itsarm. He began to laugh."Tell me about that!" he said."Oh, you Don Juan! You serpent!" cried several voices."You, Bolkonski, don't know," said Bilibin turning to Prince Andrew,"that all the atrocities of the French army (I nearly said of theRussian army) are nothing compared to what this man has been doing amongthe women!""La femme est la compagne de l'homme," * announced Prince Hippolyte, andbegan looking through a lorgnette at his elevated legs.* "Woman is man's companion."Bilibin and the rest of "ours" burst out laughing in Hippolyte's face,and Prince Andrew saw that Hippolyte, of whom--he had to admit--he hadalmost been jealous on his wife's account, was the butt of this set."Oh, I must give you a treat," Bilibin whispered to Bolkonski. "Kuraginis exquisite when he discusses politics--you should see his gravity!"He sat down beside Hippolyte and wrinkling his forehead began talking tohim about politics. Prince Andrew and the others gathered round thesetwo."The Berlin cabinet cannot express a feeling of alliance," beganHippolyte gazing round with importance at the others, "withoutexpressing... as in its last note... you understand... Besides, unlessHis Majesty the Emperor derogates from the principle of our alliance..."Wait, I have not finished..." he said to Prince Andrew, seizing him bythe arm, "I believe that intervention will be stronger thannonintervention. And..." he paused. "Finally one cannot impute thenonreceipt of our dispatch of November 18. That is how it will end." Andhe released Bolkonski's arm to indicate that he had now quite finished."Demosthenes, I know thee by the pebble thou secretest in thy goldenmouth!" said Bilibin, and the mop of hair on his head moved withsatisfaction.Everybody laughed, and Hippolyte louder than anyone. He was evidentlydistressed, and breathed painfully, but could not restrain the wildlaughter that convulsed his usually impassive features."Well now, gentlemen," said Bilibin, "Bolkonski is my guest in thishouse and in Brunn itself. I want to entertain him as far as I can, withall the pleasures of life here. If we were in Vienna it would be easy,but here, in this wretched Moravian hole, it is more difficult, and Ibeg you all to help me. Brunn's attractions must be shown him. You canundertake the theater, I society, and you, Hippolyte, of course thewomen.""We must let him see Amelie, she's exquisite!" said one of "ours,"kissing his finger tips."In general we must turn this bloodthirsty soldier to more humaneinterests," said Bilibin."I shall scarcely be able to avail myself of your hospitality,gentlemen, it is already time for me to go," replied Prince Andrewlooking at his watch."Where to?""To the Emperor.""Oh! Oh! Oh! Well, au revoir, Bolkonski! Au revoir, Prince! Come backearly to dinner," cried several voices. "We'll take you in hand.""When speaking to the Emperor, try as far as you can to praise the waythat provisions are supplied and the routes indicated," said Bilibin,accompanying him to the hall."I should like to speak well of them, but as far as I know the facts, Ican't," replied Bolkonski, smiling."Well, talk as much as you can, anyway. He has a passion for givingaudiences, but he does not like talking himself and can't do it, as youwill see."CHAPTER XIIAt the levee Prince Andrew stood among the Austrian officers as he hadbeen told to, and the Emperor Francis merely looked fixedly into hisface and just nodded to him with his long head. But after it was over,the adjutant he had seen the previous day ceremoniously informedBolkonski that the Emperor desired to give him an audience. The EmperorFrancis received him standing in the middle of the room. Before theconversation began Prince Andrew was struck by the fact that the Emperorseemed confused and blushed as if not knowing what to say."Tell me, when did the battle begin?" he asked hurriedly.Prince Andrew replied. Then followed other questions just as simple:"Was Kutuzov well? When had he left Krems?" and so on. The Emperor spokeas if his sole aim were to put a given number of questions--the answersto these questions, as was only too evident, did not interest him."At what o'clock did the battle begin?" asked the Emperor."I cannot inform Your Majesty at what o'clock the battle began at thefront, but at Durrenstein, where I was, our attack began after five inthe afternoon," replied Bolkonski growing more animated and expectingthat he would have a chance to give a reliable account, which he hadready in his mind, of all he knew and had seen. But the Emperor smiledand interrupted him."How many miles?""From where to where, Your Majesty?""From Durrenstein to Krems.""Three and a half miles, Your Majesty.""The French have abandoned the left bank?""According to the scouts the last of them crossed on rafts during thenight.""Is there sufficient forage in Krems?""Forage has not been supplied to the extent..."The Emperor interrupted him."At what o'clock was General Schmidt killed?""At seven o'clock, I believe.""At seven o'clock? It's very sad, very sad!"The Emperor thanked Prince Andrew and bowed. Prince Andrew withdrew andwas immediately surrounded by courtiers on all sides. Everywhere he sawfriendly looks and heard friendly words. Yesterday's adjutant reproachedhim for not having stayed at the palace, and offered him his own house.The Minister of War came up and congratulated him on the Maria TheresaOrder of the third grade, which the Emperor was conferring on him. TheEmpress' chamberlain invited him to see Her Majesty. The archduchessalso wished to see him. He did not know whom to answer, and for a fewseconds collected his thoughts. Then the Russian ambassador took him bythe shoulder, led him to the window, and began to talk to him.Contrary to Bilibin's forecast the news he had brought was joyfullyreceived. A thanksgiving service was arranged, Kutuzov was awarded theGrand Cross of Maria Theresa, and the whole army received rewards.Bolkonski was invited everywhere, and had to spend the whole morningcalling on the principal Austrian dignitaries. Between four and five inthe afternoon, having made all his calls, he was returning to Bilibin'shouse thinking out a letter to his father about the battle and his visitto Brunn. At the door he found a vehicle half full of luggage. Franz,Bilibin's man, was dragging a portmanteau with some difficulty out ofthe front door.Before returning to Bilibin's Prince Andrew had gone to a bookshop toprovide himself with some books for the campaign, and had spent sometime in the shop."What is it?" he asked."Oh, your excellency!" said Franz, with difficulty rolling theportmanteau into the vehicle, "we are to move on still farther. Thescoundrel is again at our heels!""Eh? What?" asked Prince Andrew.Bilibin came out to meet him. His usually calm face showed excitement."There now! Confess that this is delightful," said he. "This affair ofthe Thabor Bridge, at Vienna.... They have crossed without striking ablow!"Prince Andrew could not understand."But where do you come from not to know what every coachman in the townknows?""I come from the archduchess'. I heard nothing there.""And you didn't see that everybody is packing up?""I did not... What is it all about?" inquired Prince Andrew impatiently."What's it all about? Why, the French have crossed the bridge thatAuersperg was defending, and the bridge was not blown up: so Murat isnow rushing along the road to Brunn and will be here in a day or two.""What? Here? But why did they not blow up the bridge, if it was mined?""That is what I ask you. No one, not even Bonaparte, knows why."Bolkonski shrugged his shoulders."But if the bridge is crossed it means that the army too is lost? Itwill be cut off," said he."That's just it," answered Bilibin. "Listen! The French entered Viennaas I told you. Very well. Next day, which was yesterday, thosegentlemen, messieurs les marechaux, * Murat, Lannes, and Belliard, mountand ride to the bridge. (Observe that all three are Gascons.)'Gentlemen,' says one of them, 'you know the Thabor Bridge is mined anddoubly mined and that there are menacing fortifications at its head andan army of fifteen thousand men has been ordered to blow up the bridgeand not let us cross? But it will please our sovereign the EmperorNapoleon if we take this bridge, so let us three go and take it!' 'Yes,let's!' say the others. And off they go and take the bridge, cross it,and now with their whole army are on this side of the Danube, marchingon us, you, and your lines of communication."* The marshalls."Stop jesting," said Prince Andrew sadly and seriously. This newsgrieved him and yet he was pleased.As soon as he learned that the Russian army was in such a hopelesssituation it occurred to him that it was he who was destined to lead itout of this position; that here was the Toulon that would lift him fromthe ranks of obscure officers and offer him the first step to fame!Listening to Bilibin he was already imagining how on reaching the armyhe would give an opinion at the war council which would be the only onethat could save the army, and how he alone would be entrusted with theexecuting of the plan."Stop this jesting," he said"I am not jesting," Bilibin went on. "Nothing is truer or sadder. Thesegentlemen ride onto the bridge alone and wave white handkerchiefs; theyassure the officer on duty that they, the marshals, are on their way tonegotiate with Prince Auersperg. He lets them enter the tte-de-pont. *They spin him a thousand gasconades, saying that the war is over, thatthe Emperor Francis is arranging a meeting with Bonaparte, that theydesire to see Prince Auersperg, and so on. The officer sends forAuersperg; these gentlemen embrace the officers, crack jokes, sit on thecannon, and meanwhile a French battalion gets to the bridge unobserved,flings the bags of incendiary material into the water, and approachesthe tte-de-pont. At length appears the lieutenant general, our dearPrince Auersperg von Mautern himself. 'Dearest foe! Flower of theAustrian army, hero of the Turkish wars Hostilities are ended, we canshake one another's hand.... The Emperor Napoleon burns with impatienceto make Prince Auersperg's acquaintance.' In a word, those gentlemen,Gascons indeed, so bewildered him with fine words, and he is soflattered by his rapidly established intimacy with the French marshals,and so dazzled by the sight of Murat's mantle and ostrich plumes, qu'iln'y voit que du feu, et oublie celui qu'il devait faire faire surl'ennemi!" *(2) In spite of the animation of his speech, Bilibin did notforget to pause after this mot to give time for its due appreciation."The French battalion rushes to the bridgehead, spikes the guns, and thebridge is taken! But what is best of all," he went on, his excitementsubsiding under the delightful interest of his own story, "is that thesergeant in charge of the cannon which was to give the signal to firethe mines and blow up the bridge, this sergeant, seeing that the Frenchtroops were running onto the bridge, was about to fire, but Lannesstayed his hand. The sergeant, who was evidently wiser than his general,goes up to Auersperg and says: 'Prince, you are being deceived, here arethe French!' Murat, seeing that all is lost if the sergeant is allowedto speak, turns to Auersperg with feigned astonishment (he is a trueGascon) and says: 'I don't recognize the world-famous Austriandiscipline, if you allow a subordinate to address you like that!' It wasa stroke of genius. Prince Auersperg feels his dignity at stake andorders the sergeant to be arrested. Come, you must own that this affairof the Thabor Bridge is delightful! It is not exactly stupidity, norrascality...."* Bridgehead.* (2) That their fire gets into his eyes and he forgets that he ought tobe firing at the enemy."It may be treachery," said Prince Andrew, vividly imagining the grayovercoats, wounds, the smoke of gunpowder, the sounds of firing, and theglory that awaited him."Not that either. That puts the court in too bad a light," repliedBilibin. "It's not treachery nor rascality nor stupidity: it is just asat Ulm... it is..."--he seemed to be trying to find the rightexpression. "C'est... c'est du Mack. Nous sommes mackes (It is... it isa bit of Mack. We are Macked)," he concluded, feeling that he hadproduced a good epigram, a fresh one that would be repeated. Hishitherto puckered brow became smooth as a sign of pleasure, and with aslight smile he began to examine his nails."Where are you off to?" he said suddenly to Prince Andrew who had risenand was going toward his room."I am going away.""Where to?""To the army.""But you meant to stay another two days?""But now I am off at once."And Prince Andrew after giving directions about his departure went tohis room."Do you know, mon cher," said Bilibin following him, "I have beenthinking about you. Why are you going?"And in proof of the conclusiveness of his opinion all the wrinklesvanished from his face.Prince Andrew looked inquiringly at him and gave no reply."Why are you going? I know you think it your duty to gallop back to thearmy now that it is in danger. I understand that. Mon cher, it isheroism!""Not at all," said Prince Andrew."But as you are a philosopher, be a consistent one, look at the otherside of the question and you will see that your duty, on the contrary,is to take care of yourself. Leave it to those who are no longer fit foranything else.... You have not been ordered to return and have not beendismissed from here; therefore, you can stay and go with us wherever ourill luck takes us. They say we are going to Olmutz, and Olmutz is a verydecent town. You and I will travel comfortably in my caleche.""Do stop joking, Bilibin," cried Bolkonski."I am speaking sincerely as a friend! Consider! Where and why are yougoing, when you might remain here? You are faced by one of two things,"and the skin over his left temple puckered, "either you will not reachyour regiment before peace is concluded, or you will share defeat anddisgrace with Kutuzov's whole army."And Bilibin unwrinkled his temple, feeling that the dilemma wasinsoluble."I cannot argue about it," replied Prince Andrew coldly, but he thought:"I am going to save the army.""My dear fellow, you are a hero!" said Bilibin.CHAPTER XIIIThat same night, having taken leave of the Minister of War, Bolkonskiset off to rejoin the army, not knowing where he would find it andfearing to be captured by the French on the way to Krems.In Brunn everybody attached to the court was packing up, and the heavybaggage was already being dispatched to Olmutz. Near Hetzelsdorf PrinceAndrew struck the high road along which the Russian army was moving withgreat haste and in the greatest disorder. The road was so obstructedwith carts that it was impossible to get by in a carriage. Prince Andrewtook a horse and a Cossack from a Cossack commander, and hungry andweary, making his way past the baggage wagons, rode in search of thecommander-in-chief and of his own luggage. Very sinister reports of theposition of the army reached him as he went along, and the appearance ofthe troops in their disorderly flight confirmed these rumors."Cette armee russe que l'or de l'Angleterre a transportee des extremitesde l'univers, nous allons lui faire eprouver le meme sort--(le sort del'armee d'Ulm)." * He remembered these words in Bonaparte's address tohis army at the beginning of the campaign, and they awoke in himastonishment at the genius of his hero, a feeling of wounded pride, anda hope of glory. "And should there be nothing left but to die?" hethought. "Well, if need be, I shall do it no worse than others."* "That Russian army which has been brought from the ends of the earthby English gold, we shall cause to share the same fate--(the fate of thearmy at Ulm)."He looked with disdain at the endless confused mass of detachments,carts, guns, artillery, and again baggage wagons and vehicles of allkinds overtaking one another and blocking the muddy road, three andsometimes four abreast. From all sides, behind and before, as far as earcould reach, there were the rattle of wheels, the creaking of carts andgun carriages, the tramp of horses, the crack of whips, shouts, theurging of horses, and the swearing of soldiers, orderlies, and officers.All along the sides of the road fallen horses were to be seen, someflayed, some not, and broken-down carts beside which solitary soldierssat waiting for something, and again soldiers straggling from theircompanies, crowds of whom set off to the neighboring villages, orreturned from them dragging sheep, fowls, hay, and bulging sacks. Ateach ascent or descent of the road the crowds were yet denser and thedin of shouting more incessant. Soldiers floundering knee-deep in mudpushed the guns and wagons themselves. Whips cracked, hoofs slipped,traces broke, and lungs were strained with shouting. The officersdirecting the march rode backward and forward between the carts. Theirvoices were but feebly heard amid the uproar and one saw by their facesthat they despaired of the possibility of checking this disorder."Here is our dear Orthodox Russian army," thought Bolkonski, recallingBilibin's words.Wishing to find out where the commander-in-chief was, he rode up to aconvoy. Directly opposite to him came a strange one-horse vehicle,evidently rigged up by soldiers out of any available materials andlooking like something between a cart, a cabriolet, and a caleche. Asoldier was driving, and a woman enveloped in shawls sat behind theapron under the leather hood of the vehicle. Prince Andrew rode up andwas just putting his question to a soldier when his attention wasdiverted by the desperate shrieks of the woman in the vehicle. Anofficer in charge of transport was beating the soldier who was drivingthe woman's vehicle for trying to get ahead of others, and the strokesof his whip fell on the apron of the equipage. The woman screamedpiercingly. Seeing Prince Andrew she leaned out from behind the apronand, waving her thin arms from under the woolen shawl, cried:"Mr. Aide-de-camp! Mr. Aide-de-camp!... For heaven's sake... Protect me!What will become of us? I am the wife of the doctor of the SeventhChasseurs.... They won't let us pass, we are left behind and have lostour people...""I'll flatten you into a pancake!" shouted the angry officer to thesoldier. "Turn back with your slut!""Mr. Aide-de-camp! Help me!... What does it all mean?" screamed thedoctor's wife."Kindly let this cart pass. Don't you see it's a woman?" said PrinceAndrew riding up to the officer.The officer glanced at him, and without replying turned again to thesoldier. "I'll teach you to push on!... Back!""Let them pass, I tell you!" repeated Prince Andrew, compressing hislips."And who are you?" cried the officer, turning on him with tipsy rage,"who are you? Are you in command here? Eh? I am commander here, not you!Go back or I'll flatten you into a pancake," repeated he. Thisexpression evidently pleased him."That was a nice snub for the little aide-de-camp," came a voice frombehind.Prince Andrew saw that the officer was in that state of senseless, tipsyrage when a man does not know what he is saying. He saw that hischampionship of the doctor's wife in her queer trap might expose him towhat he dreaded more than anything in the world--to ridicule; but hisinstinct urged him on. Before the officer finished his sentence PrinceAndrew, his face distorted with fury, rode up to him and raised hisriding whip."Kind...ly let--them--pass!"The officer flourished his arm and hastily rode away."It's all the fault of these fellows on the staff that there's thisdisorder," he muttered. "Do as you like."Prince Andrew without lifting his eyes rode hastily away from thedoctor's wife, who was calling him her deliverer, and recalling with asense of disgust the minutest details of this humiliating scene hegalloped on to the village where he was told that the commander-in-chiefwas.On reaching the village he dismounted and went to the nearest house,intending to rest if but for a moment, eat something, and try to sortout the stinging and tormenting thoughts that confused his mind. "Thisis a mob of scoundrels and not an army," he was thinking as he went upto the window of the first house, when a familiar voice called him byname.He turned round. Nesvitski's handsome face looked out of the littlewindow. Nesvitski, moving his moist lips as he chewed something, andflourishing his arm, called him to enter."Bolkonski! Bolkonski!... Don't you hear? Eh? Come quick..." he shouted.Entering the house, Prince Andrew saw Nesvitski and another adjutanthaving something to eat. They hastily turned round to him asking if hehad any news. On their familiar faces he read agitation and alarm. Thiswas particularly noticeable on Nesvitski's usually laughing countenance."Where is the commander-in-chief?" asked Bolkonski."Here, in that house," answered the adjutant."Well, is it true that it's peace and capitulation?" asked Nesvitski."I was going to ask you. I know nothing except that it was all I coulddo to get here.""And we, my dear boy! It's terrible! I was wrong to laugh at Mack, we'regetting it still worse," said Nesvitski. "But sit down and havesomething to eat.""You won't be able to find either your baggage or anything else now,Prince. And God only knows where your man Peter is," said the otheradjutant."Where are headquarters?""We are to spend the night in Znaim.""Well, I have got all I need into packs for two horses," said Nesvitski."They've made up splendid packs for me--fit to cross the Bohemianmountains with. It's a bad lookout, old fellow! But what's the matterwith you? You must be ill to shiver like that," he added, noticing thatPrince Andrew winced as at an electric shock."It's nothing," replied Prince Andrew.He had just remembered his recent encounter with the doctor's wife andthe convoy officer."What is the commander-in-chief doing here?" he asked."I can't make out at all," said Nesvitski."Well, all I can make out is that everything is abominable, abominable,quite abominable!" said Prince Andrew, and he went off to the housewhere the commander-in-chief was.Passing by Kutuzov's carriage and the exhausted saddle horses of hissuite, with their Cossacks who were talking loudly together, PrinceAndrew entered the passage. Kutuzov himself, he was told, was in thehouse with Prince Bagration and Weyrother. Weyrother was the Austriangeneral who had succeeded Schmidt. In the passage little Kozlovski wassquatting on his heels in front of a clerk. The clerk, with cuffs turnedup, was hastily writing at a tub turned bottom upwards. Kozlovski's facelooked worn--he too had evidently not slept all night. He glanced atPrince Andrew and did not even nod to him."Second line... have you written it?" he continued dictating to theclerk. "The Kiev Grenadiers, Podolian...""One can't write so fast, your honor," said the clerk, glancing angrilyand disrespectfully at Kozlovski.Through the door came the sounds of Kutuzov's voice, excited anddissatisfied, interrupted by another, an unfamiliar voice. From thesound of these voices, the inattentive way Kozlovski looked at him, thedisrespectful manner of the exhausted clerk, the fact that the clerk andKozlovski were squatting on the floor by a tub so near to the commanderin chief, and from the noisy laughter of the Cossacks holding the horsesnear the window, Prince Andrew felt that something important anddisastrous was about to happen.He turned to Kozlovski with urgent questions."Immediately, Prince," said Kozlovski. "Dispositions for Bagration.""What about capitulation?""Nothing of the sort. Orders are issued for a battle."Prince Andrew moved toward the door from whence voices were heard. Justas he was going to open it the sounds ceased, the door opened, andKutuzov with his eagle nose and puffy face appeared in the doorway.Prince Andrew stood right in front of Kutuzov but the expression of thecommander in chief's one sound eye showed him to be so preoccupied withthoughts and anxieties as to be oblivious of his presence. He lookedstraight at his adjutant's face without recognizing him."Well, have you finished?" said he to Kozlovski."One moment, your excellency."Bagration, a gaunt middle-aged man of medium height with a firm,impassive face of Oriental type, came out after the commander-in-chief."I have the honor to present myself," repeated Prince Andrew ratherloudly, handing Kutuzov an envelope."Ah, from Vienna? Very good. Later, later!"Kutuzov went out into the porch with Bagration."Well, good-by, Prince," said he to Bagration. "My blessing, and mayChrist be with you in your great endeavor!"His face suddenly softened and tears came into his eyes. With his lefthand he drew Bagration toward him, and with his right, on which he worea ring, he made the sign of the cross over him with a gesture evidentlyhabitual, offering his puffy cheek, but Bagration kissed him on the neckinstead."Christ be with you!" Kutuzov repeated and went toward his carriage."Get in with me," said he to Bolkonski."Your excellency, I should like to be of use here. Allow me to remainwith Prince Bagration's detachment.""Get in," said Kutuzov, and noticing that Bolkonski still delayed, headded: "I need good officers myself, need them myself!"They got into the carriage and drove for a few minutes in silence."There is still much, much before us," he said, as if with an old man'spenetration he understood all that was passing in Bolkonski's mind. "Ifa tenth part of his detachment returns I shall thank God," he added asif speaking to himself.Prince Andrew glanced at Kutuzov's face only a foot distant from him andinvoluntarily noticed the carefully washed seams of the scar near histemple, where an Ismail bullet had pierced his skull, and the empty eyesocket. "Yes, he has a right to speak so calmly of those men's death,"thought Bolkonski."That is why I beg to be sent to that detachment," he said.Kutuzov did not reply. He seemed to have forgotten what he had beensaying, and sat plunged in thought. Five minutes later, gently swayingon the soft springs of the carriage, he turned to Prince Andrew. Therewas not a trace of agitation on his face. With delicate irony hequestioned Prince Andrew about the details of his interview with theEmperor, about the remarks he had heard at court concerning the Kremsaffair, and about some ladies they both knew.CHAPTER XIVOn November 1 Kutuzov had received, through a spy, news that the army hecommanded was in an almost hopeless position. The spy reported that theFrench, after crossing the bridge at Vienna, were advancing in immenseforce upon Kutuzov's line of communication with the troops that werearriving from Russia. If Kutuzov decided to remain at Krems, Napoleon'sarmy of one hundred and fifty thousand men would cut him off completelyand surround his exhausted army of forty thousand, and he would findhimself in the position of Mack at Ulm. If Kutuzov decided to abandonthe road connecting him with the troops arriving from Russia, he wouldhave to march with no road into unknown parts of the Bohemian mountains,defending himself against superior forces of the enemy and abandoningall hope of a junction with Buxhowden. If Kutuzov decided to retreatalong the road from Krems to Olmutz, to unite with the troops arrivingfrom Russia, he risked being forestalled on that road by the French whohad crossed the Vienna bridge, and encumbered by his baggage andtransport, having to accept battle on the march against an enemy threetimes as strong, who would hem him in from two sides.Kutuzov chose this latter course.The French, the spy reported, having crossed the Vienna bridge, wereadvancing by forced marches toward Znaim, which lay sixty-six miles offon the line of Kutuzov's retreat. If he reached Znaim before the French,there would be great hope of saving the army; to let the Frenchforestall him at Znaim meant the exposure of his whole army to adisgrace such as that of Ulm, or to utter destruction. But to forestallthe French with his whole army was impossible. The road for the Frenchfrom Vienna to Znaim was shorter and better than the road for theRussians from Krems to Znaim.The night he received the news, Kutuzov sent Bagration's vanguard, fourthousand strong, to the right across the hills from the Krems-Znaim tothe Vienna-Znaim road. Bagration was to make this march without resting,and to halt facing Vienna with Znaim to his rear, and if he succeeded inforestalling the French he was to delay them as long as possible.Kutuzov himself with all his transport took the road to Znaim.Marching thirty miles that stormy night across roadless hills, with hishungry, ill-shod soldiers, and losing a third of his men as stragglersby the way, Bagration came out on the Vienna-Znaim road at Hollabrunn afew hours ahead of the French who were approaching Hollabrunn fromVienna. Kutuzov with his transport had still to march for some daysbefore he could reach Znaim. Hence Bagration with his four thousandhungry, exhausted men would have to detain for days the whole enemy armythat came upon him at Hollabrunn, which was clearly impossible. But afreak of fate made the impossible possible. The success of the trickthat had placed the Vienna bridge in the hands of the French without afight led Murat to try to deceive Kutuzov in a similar way. MeetingBagration's weak detachment on the Znaim road he supposed it to beKutuzov's whole army. To be able to crush it absolutely he awaited thearrival of the rest of the troops who were on their way from Vienna, andwith this object offered a three days' truce on condition that botharmies should remain in position without moving. Murat declared thatnegotiations for peace were already proceeding, and that he thereforeoffered this truce to avoid unnecessary bloodshed. Count Nostitz, theAustrian general occupying the advanced posts, believed Murat's emissaryand retired, leaving Bagration's division exposed. Another emissary rodeto the Russian line to announce the peace negotiations and to offer theRussian army the three days' truce. Bagration replied that he was notauthorized either to accept or refuse a truce and sent his adjutant toKutuzov to report the offer he had received.A truce was Kutuzov's sole chance of gaining time, giving Bagration'sexhausted troops some rest, and letting the transport and heavy convoys(whose movements were concealed from the French) advance if but onestage nearer Znaim. The offer of a truce gave the only, and a quiteunexpected, chance of saving the army. On receiving the news heimmediately dispatched Adjutant General Wintzingerode, who was inattendance on him, to the enemy camp. Wintzingerode was not merely toagree to the truce but also to offer terms of capitulation, andmeanwhile Kutuzov sent his adjutants back to hasten to the utmost themovements of the baggage trains of the entire army along the Krems-Znaimroad. Bagration's exhausted and hungry detachment, which alone coveredthis movement of the transport and of the whole army, had to remainstationary in face of an enemy eight times as strong as itself.Kutuzov's expectations that the proposals of capitulation (which were inno way binding) might give time for part of the transport to pass, andalso that Murat's mistake would very soon be discovered, proved correct.As soon as Bonaparte (who was at Schonbrunn, sixteen miles fromHollabrunn) received Murat's dispatch with the proposal of a truce and acapitulation, he detected a ruse and wrote the following letter toMurat:Schonbrunn, 25th Brumaire, 1805,at eight o'clock in the morningTo PRINCE MURAT,I cannot find words to express to you my displeasure. You command onlymy advance guard, and have no right to arrange an armistice without myorder. You are causing me to lose the fruits of a campaign. Break thearmistice immediately and march on the enemy. Inform him that thegeneral who signed that capitulation had no right to do so, and that noone but the Emperor of Russia has that right.If, however, the Emperor of Russia ratifies that convention, I willratify it; but it is only a trick. March on, destroy the Russianarmy.... You are in a position to seize its baggage and artillery.The Russian Emperor's aide-de-camp is an impostor. Officers are nothingwhen they have no powers; this one had none.... The Austrians letthemselves be tricked at the crossing of the Vienna bridge, you areletting yourself be tricked by an aide-de-camp of the Emperor.NAPOLEONBonaparte's adjutant rode full gallop with this menacing letter toMurat. Bonaparte himself, not trusting to his generals, moved with allthe Guards to the field of battle, afraid of letting a ready victimescape, and Bagration's four thousand men merrily lighted campfires,dried and warmed themselves, cooked their porridge for the first timefor three days, and not one of them knew or imagined what was in storefor him.CHAPTER XVBetween three and four o'clock in the afternoon Prince Andrew, who hadpersisted in his request to Kutuzov, arrived at Grunth and reportedhimself to Bagration. Bonaparte's adjutant had not yet reached Murat'sdetachment and the battle had not yet begun. In Bagration's detachmentno one knew anything of the general position of affairs. They talked ofpeace but did not believe in its possibility; others talked of a battlebut also disbelieved in the nearness of an engagement. Bagration,knowing Bolkonski to be a favorite and trusted adjutant, received himwith distinction and special marks of favor, explaining to him thatthere would probably be an engagement that day or the next, and givinghim full liberty to remain with him during the battle or to join therearguard and have an eye on the order of retreat, "which is also veryimportant.""However, there will hardly be an engagement today," said Bagration asif to reassure Prince Andrew."If he is one of the ordinary little staff dandies sent to earn a medalhe can get his reward just as well in the rearguard, but if he wishes tostay with me, let him... he'll be of use here if he's a brave officer,"thought Bagration. Prince Andrew, without replying, asked the prince'spermission to ride round the position to see the disposition of theforces, so as to know his bearings should he be sent to execute anorder. The officer on duty, a handsome, elegantly dressed man with adiamond ring on his forefinger, who was fond of speaking French thoughhe spoke it badly, offered to conduct Prince Andrew.On all sides they saw rain-soaked officers with dejected faces whoseemed to be seeking something, and soldiers dragging doors, benches,and fencing from the village."There now, Prince! We can't stop those fellows," said the staff officerpointing to the soldiers. "The officers don't keep them in hand. Andthere," he pointed to a sutler's tent, "they crowd in and sit. Thismorning I turned them all out and now look, it's full again. I must gothere, Prince, and scare them a bit. It won't take a moment.""Yes, let's go in and I will get myself a roll and some cheese," saidPrince Andrew who had not yet had time to eat anything."Why didn't you mention it, Prince? I would have offered you something."They dismounted and entered the tent. Several officers, with flushed andweary faces, were sitting at the table eating and drinking."Now what does this mean, gentlemen?" said the staff officer, in thereproachful tone of a man who has repeated the same thing more thanonce. "You know it won't do to leave your posts like this. The princegave orders that no one should leave his post. Now you, Captain," and heturned to a thin, dirty little artillery officer who without his boots(he had given them to the canteen keeper to dry), in only his stockings,rose when they entered, smiling not altogether comfortably."Well, aren't you ashamed of yourself, Captain Tushin?" he continued."One would think that as an artillery officer you would set a goodexample, yet here you are without your boots! The alarm will be soundedand you'll be in a pretty position without your boots!" (The staffofficer smiled.) "Kindly return to your posts, gentlemen, all of you,all!" he added in a tone of command.Prince Andrew smiled involuntarily as he looked at the artillery officerTushin, who silent and smiling, shifting from one stockinged foot to theother, glanced inquiringly with his large, intelligent, kindly eyes fromPrince Andrew to the staff officer."The soldiers say it feels easier without boots," said Captain Tushinsmiling shyly in his uncomfortable position, evidently wishing to adopta jocular tone. But before he had finished he felt that his jest wasunacceptable and had not come off. He grew confused."Kindly return to your posts," said the staff officer trying to preservehis gravity.Prince Andrew glanced again at the artillery officer's small figure.There was something peculiar about it, quite unsoldierly, rather comic,but extremely attractive.The staff officer and Prince Andrew mounted their horses and rode on.Having ridden beyond the village, continually meeting and overtakingsoldiers and officers of various regiments, they saw on their left someentrenchments being thrown up, the freshly dug clay of which showed upred. Several battalions of soldiers, in their shirt sleeves despite thecold wind, swarmed in these earthworks like a host of white ants;spadefuls of red clay were continually being thrown up from behind thebank by unseen hands. Prince Andrew and the officer rode up, looked atthe entrenchment, and went on again. Just behind it they came upon somedozens of soldiers, continually replaced by others, who ran from theentrenchment. They had to hold their noses and put their horses to atrot to escape from the poisoned atmosphere of these latrines."Voila l'agrement des camps, monsieur le Prince," * said the staffofficer.* "This is a pleasure one gets in camp, Prince."They rode up the opposite hill. From there the French could already beseen. Prince Andrew stopped and began examining the position."That's our battery," said the staff officer indicating the highestpoint. "It's in charge of the queer fellow we saw without his boots. Youcan see everything from there; let's go there, Prince.""Thank you very much, I will go on alone," said Prince Andrew, wishingto rid himself of this staff officer's company, "please don't troubleyourself further."The staff officer remained behind and Prince Andrew rode on alone.The farther forward and nearer the enemy he went, the more orderly andcheerful were the troops. The greatest disorder and depression had beenin the baggage train he had passed that morning on the Znaim road sevenmiles away from the French. At Grunth also some apprehension and alarmcould be felt, but the nearer Prince Andrew came to the French lines themore confident was the appearance of our troops. The soldiers in theirgreatcoats were ranged in lines, the sergeants major and companyofficers were counting the men, poking the last man in each section inthe ribs and telling him to hold his hand up. Soldiers scattered overthe whole place were dragging logs and brushwood and were buildingshelters with merry chatter and laughter; around the fires sat others,dressed and undressed, drying their shirts and leg bands or mendingboots or overcoats and crowding round the boilers and porridge cookers.In one company dinner was ready, and the soldiers were gazing eagerly atthe steaming boiler, waiting till the sample, which a quartermastersergeant was carrying in a wooden bowl to an officer who sat on a logbefore his shelter, had been tasted.Another company, a lucky one for not all the companies had vodka,crowded round a pockmarked, broad-shouldered sergeant major who, tiltinga keg, filled one after another the canteen lids held out to him. Thesoldiers lifted the canteen lids to their lips with reverential faces,emptied them, rolling the vodka in their mouths, and walked away fromthe sergeant major with brightened expressions, licking their lips andwiping them on the sleeves of their greatcoats. All their faces were asserene as if all this were happening at home awaiting peacefulencampment, and not within sight of the enemy before an action in whichat least half of them would be left on the field. After passing achasseur regiment and in the lines of the Kiev grenadiers--fine fellowsbusy with similar peaceful affairs--near the shelter of the regimentalcommander, higher than and different from the others, Prince Andrew cameout in front of a platoon of grenadiers before whom lay a naked man. Twosoldiers held him while two others were flourishing their switches andstriking him regularly on his bare back. The man shrieked unnaturally. Astout major was pacing up and down the line, and regardless of thescreams kept repeating:"It's a shame for a soldier to steal; a soldier must be honest,honorable, and brave, but if he robs his fellows there is no honor inhim, he's a scoundrel. Go on! Go on!"So the swishing sound of the strokes, and the desperate but unnaturalscreams, continued."Go on, go on!" said the major.A young officer with a bewildered and pained expression on his facestepped away from the man and looked round inquiringly at the adjutantas he rode by.Prince Andrew, having reached the front line, rode along it. Our frontline and that of the enemy were far apart on the right and left flanks,but in the center where the men with a flag of truce had passed thatmorning, the lines were so near together that the men could see oneanother's faces and speak to one another. Besides the soldiers whoformed the picket line on either side, there were many curious onlookerswho, jesting and laughing, stared at their strange foreign enemies.Since early morning--despite an injunction not to approach the picketline--the officers had been unable to keep sight-seers away. Thesoldiers forming the picket line, like showmen exhibiting a curiosity,no longer looked at the French but paid attention to the sight-seers andgrew weary waiting to be relieved. Prince Andrew halted to have a lookat the French."Look! Look there!" one soldier was saying to another, pointing to aRussian musketeer who had gone up to the picket line with an officer andwas rapidly and excitedly talking to a French grenadier. "Hark to himjabbering! Fine, isn't it? It's all the Frenchy can do to keep up withhim. There now, Sidorov!""Wait a bit and listen. It's fine!" answered Sidorov, who was consideredan adept at French.The soldier to whom the laughers referred was Dolokhov. Prince Andrewrecognized him and stopped to listen to what he was saying. Dolokhov hadcome from the left flank where their regiment was stationed, with hiscaptain."Now then, go on, go on!" incited the officer, bending forward andtrying not to lose a word of the speech which was incomprehensible tohim. "More, please: more! What's he saying?"Dolokhov did not answer the captain; he had been drawn into a hotdispute with the French grenadier. They were naturally talking about thecampaign. The Frenchman, confusing the Austrians with the Russians, wastrying to prove that the Russians had surrendered and had fled all theway from Ulm, while Dolokhov maintained that the Russians had notsurrendered but had beaten the French."We have orders to drive you off here, and we shall drive you off," saidDolokhov."Only take care you and your Cossacks are not all captured!" said theFrench grenadier.The French onlookers and listeners laughed."We'll make you dance as we did under Suvorov...," * said Dolokhov.* "On vous fera danser.""Qu' est-ce qu'il chante?" * asked a Frenchman.* "What's he singing about?""It's ancient history," said another, guessing that it referred to aformer war. "The Emperor will teach your Suvara as he has taught theothers...""Bonaparte..." began Dolokhov, but the Frenchman interrupted him."Not Bonaparte. He is the Emperor! Sacre nom...!" cried he angrily."The devil skin your Emperor."And Dolokhov swore at him in coarse soldier's Russian and shoulderinghis musket walked away."Let us go, Ivan Lukich," he said to the captain."Ah, that's the way to talk French," said the picket soldiers. "Now,Sidorov, you have a try!"Sidorov, turning to the French, winked, and began to jabber meaninglesssounds very fast: "Kari, mala, tafa, safi, muter, Kaska," he said,trying to give an expressive intonation to his voice."Ho! ho! ho! Ha! ha! ha! ha! Ouh! ouh!" came peals of such healthy andgood-humored laughter from the soldiers that it infected the Frenchinvoluntarily, so much so that the only thing left to do seemed to be tounload the muskets, explode the ammunition, and all return home asquickly as possible.But the guns remained loaded, the loopholes in blockhouses andentrenchments looked out just as menacingly, and the unlimbered cannonconfronted one another as before.CHAPTER XVIHaving ridden round the whole line from right flank to left, PrinceAndrew made his way up to the battery from which the staff officer hadtold him the whole field could be seen. Here he dismounted, and stoppedbeside the farthest of the four unlimbered cannon. Before the guns anartillery sentry was pacing up and down; he stood at attention when theofficer arrived, but at a sign resumed his measured, monotonous pacing.Behind the guns were their limbers and still farther back picket ropesand artillerymen's bonfires. To the left, not far from the farthestcannon, was a small, newly constructed wattle shed from which came thesound of officers' voices in eager conversation.It was true that a view over nearly the whole Russian position and thegreater part of the enemy's opened out from this battery. Just facingit, on the crest of the opposite hill, the village of Schon Graberncould be seen, and in three places to left and right the French troopsamid the smoke of their campfires, the greater part of whom wereevidently in the village itself and behind the hill. To the left fromthat village, amid the smoke, was something resembling a battery, but itwas impossible to see it clearly with the naked eye. Our right flank wasposted on a rather steep incline which dominated the French position.Our infantry were stationed there, and at the farthest point thedragoons. In the center, where Tushin's battery stood and from whichPrince Andrew was surveying the position, was the easiest and mostdirect descent and ascent to the brook separating us from Schon Grabern.On the left our troops were close to a copse, in which smoked thebonfires of our infantry who were felling wood. The French line waswider than ours, and it was plain that they could easily outflank us onboth sides. Behind our position was a steep and deep dip, making itdifficult for artillery and cavalry to retire. Prince Andrew took outhis notebook and, leaning on the cannon, sketched a plan of theposition. He made some notes on two points, intending to mention them toBagration. His idea was, first, to concentrate all the artillery in thecenter, and secondly, to withdraw the cavalry to the other side of thedip. Prince Andrew, being always near the commander in chief, closelyfollowing the mass movements and general orders, and constantly studyinghistorical accounts of battles, involuntarily pictured to himself thecourse of events in the forthcoming action in broad outline. He imaginedonly important possibilities: "If the enemy attacks the right flank," hesaid to himself, "the Kiev grenadiers and the Podolsk chasseurs musthold their position till reserves from the center come up. In that casethe dragoons could successfully make a flank counterattack. If theyattack our center we, having the center battery on this high ground,shall withdraw the left flank under its cover, and retreat to the dip byechelons." So he reasoned.... All the time he had been beside the gun,he had heard the voices of the officers distinctly, but as often happenshad not understood a word of what they were saying. Suddenly, however,he was struck by a voice coming from the shed, and its tone was sosincere that he could not but listen."No, friend," said a pleasant and, as it seemed to Prince Andrew, afamiliar voice, "what I say is that if it were possible to know what isbeyond death, none of us would be afraid of it. That's so, friend."Another, a younger voice, interrupted him: "Afraid or not, you can'tescape it anyhow.""All the same, one is afraid! Oh, you clever people," said a third manlyvoice interrupting them both. "Of course you artillery men are verywise, because you can take everything along with you--vodka and snacks."And the owner of the manly voice, evidently an infantry officer,laughed."Yes, one is afraid," continued the first speaker, he of the familiarvoice. "One is afraid of the unknown, that's what it is. Whatever we maysay about the soul going to the sky... we know there is no sky but onlyan atmosphere."The manly voice again interrupted the artillery officer."Well, stand us some of your herb vodka, Tushin," it said."Why," thought Prince Andrew, "that's the captain who stood up in thesutler's hut without his boots." He recognized the agreeable,philosophizing voice with pleasure."Some herb vodka? Certainly!" said Tushin. "But still, to conceive afuture life..."He did not finish. Just then there was a whistle in the air; nearer andnearer, faster and louder, louder and faster, a cannon ball, as if ithad not finished saying what was necessary, thudded into the ground nearthe shed with super human force, throwing up a mass of earth. The groundseemed to groan at the terrible impact.And immediately Tushin, with a short pipe in the corner of his mouth andhis kind, intelligent face rather pale, rushed out of the shed followedby the owner of the manly voice, a dashing infantry officer who hurriedoff to his company, buttoning up his coat as he ran.CHAPTER XVIIMounting his horse again Prince Andrew lingered with the battery,looking at the puff from the gun that had sent the ball. His eyes ranrapidly over the wide space, but he only saw that the hithertomotionless masses of the French now swayed and that there really was abattery to their left. The smoke above it had not yet dispersed. Twomounted Frenchmen, probably adjutants, were galloping up the hill. Asmall but distinctly visible enemy column was moving down the hill,probably to strengthen the front line. The smoke of the first shot hadnot yet dispersed before another puff appeared, followed by a report.The battle had begun! Prince Andrew turned his horse and galloped backto Grunth to find Prince Bagration. He heard the cannonade behind himgrowing louder and more frequent. Evidently our guns had begun to reply.From the bottom of the slope, where the parleys had taken place, camethe report of musketry.Lemarrois had just arrived at a gallop with Bonaparte's stern letter,and Murat, humiliated and anxious to expiate his fault, had at oncemoved his forces to attack the center and outflank both the Russianwings, hoping before evening and before the arrival of the Emperor tocrush the contemptible detachment that stood before him."It has begun. Here it is!" thought Prince Andrew, feeling the bloodrush to his heart. "But where and how will my Toulon present itself?"Passing between the companies that had been eating porridge and drinkingvodka a quarter of an hour before, he saw everywhere the same rapidmovement of soldiers forming ranks and getting their muskets ready, andon all their faces he recognized the same eagerness that filled hisheart. "It has begun! Here it is, dreadful but enjoyable!" was what theface of each soldier and each officer seemed to say.Before he had reached the embankments that were being thrown up, he saw,in the light of the dull autumn evening, mounted men coming toward him.The foremost, wearing a Cossack cloak and lambskin cap and riding awhite horse, was Prince Bagration. Prince Andrew stopped, waiting forhim to come up; Prince Bagration reined in his horse and recognizingPrince Andrew nodded to him. He still looked ahead while Prince Andrewtold him what he had seen.The feeling, "It has begun! Here it is!" was seen even on PrinceBagration's hard brown face with its half-closed, dull, sleepy eyes.Prince Andrew gazed with anxious curiosity at that impassive face andwished he could tell what, if anything, this man was thinking andfeeling at that moment. "Is there anything at all behind that impassiveface?" Prince Andrew asked himself as he looked. Prince Bagration benthis head in sign of agreement with what Prince Andrew told him, andsaid, "Very good!" in a tone that seemed to imply that everything thattook place and was reported to him was exactly what he had foreseen.Prince Andrew, out of breath with his rapid ride, spoke quickly. PrinceBagration, uttering his words with an Oriental accent, spokeparticularly slowly, as if to impress the fact that there was no need tohurry. However, he put his horse to a trot in the direction of Tushin'sbattery. Prince Andrew followed with the suite. Behind Prince Bagrationrode an officer of the suite, the prince's personal adjutant, Zherkov,an orderly officer, the staff officer on duty, riding a fine bobtailedhorse, and a civilian--an accountant who had asked permission to bepresent at the battle out of curiosity. The accountant, a stout, full-faced man, looked around him with a naive smile of satisfaction andpresented a strange appearance among the hussars, Cossacks, andadjutants, in his camlet coat, as he jolted on his horse with a convoyofficer's saddle."He wants to see a battle," said Zherkov to Bolkonski, pointing to theaccountant, "but he feels a pain in the pit of his stomach already.""Oh, leave off!" said the accountant with a beaming but rather cunningsmile, as if flattered at being made the subject of Zherkov's joke, andpurposely trying to appear stupider than he really was."It is very strange, mon Monsieur Prince," said the staff officer. (Heremembered that in French there is some peculiar way of addressing aprince, but could not get it quite right.)By this time they were all approaching Tushin's battery, and a ballstruck the ground in front of them."What's that that has fallen?" asked the accountant with a naive smile."A French pancake," answered Zherkov."So that's what they hit with?" asked the accountant. "How awful!"He seemed to swell with satisfaction. He had hardly finished speakingwhen they again heard an unexpectedly violent whistling which suddenlyended with a thud into something soft... f-f-flop! and a Cossack, ridinga little to their right and behind the accountant, crashed to earth withhis horse. Zherkov and the staff officer bent over their saddles andturned their horses away. The accountant stopped, facing the Cossack,and examined him with attentive curiosity. The Cossack was dead, but thehorse still struggled.Prince Bagration screwed up his eyes, looked round, and, seeing thecause of the confusion, turned away with indifference, as if to say, "Isit worth while noticing trifles?" He reined in his horse with the careof a skillful rider and, slightly bending over, disengaged his saberwhich had caught in his cloak. It was an old-fashioned saber of a kindno longer in general use. Prince Andrew remembered the story of Suvorovgiving his saber to Bagration in Italy, and the recollection wasparticularly pleasant at that moment. They had reached the battery atwhich Prince Andrew had been when he examined the battlefield."Whose company?" asked Prince Bagration of an artilleryman standing bythe ammunition wagon.He asked, "Whose company?" but he really meant, "Are you frightenedhere?" and the artilleryman understood him."Captain Tushin's, your excellency!" shouted the red-haired, freckledgunner in a merry voice, standing to attention."Yes, yes," muttered Bagration as if considering something, and he rodepast the limbers to the farthest cannon.As he approached, a ringing shot issued from it deafening him and hissuite, and in the smoke that suddenly surrounded the gun they could seethe gunners who had seized it straining to roll it quickly back to itsformer position. A huge, broad-shouldered gunner, Number One, holding amop, his legs far apart, sprang to the wheel; while Number Two with atrembling hand placed a charge in the cannon's mouth. The short, round-shouldered Captain Tushin, stumbling over the tail of the gun carriage,moved forward and, not noticing the general, looked out shading his eyeswith his small hand."Lift it two lines more and it will be just right," cried he in a feeblevoice to which he tried to impart a dashing note, ill-suited to his weakfigure. "Number Two!" he squeaked. "Fire, Medvedev!"Bagration called to him, and Tushin, raising three fingers to his capwith a bashful and awkward gesture not at all like a military salute butlike a priest's benediction, approached the general. Though Tushin'sguns had been intended to cannonade the valley, he was firing incendiaryballs at the village of Schon Grabern visible just opposite, in front ofwhich large masses of French were advancing.No one had given Tushin orders where and at what to fire, but afterconsulting his sergeant major, Zakharchenko, for whom he had greatrespect, he had decided that it would be a good thing to set fire to thevillage. "Very good!" said Bagration in reply to the officer's report,and began deliberately to examine the whole battlefield extended beforehim. The French had advanced nearest on our right. Below the height onwhich the Kiev regiment was stationed, in the hollow where the rivuletflowed, the soul-stirring rolling and crackling of musketry was heard,and much farther to the right beyond the dragoons, the officer of thesuite pointed out to Bagration a French column that was outflanking us.To the left the horizon bounded by the adjacent wood. Prince Bagrationordered two battalions from the center to be sent to reinforce the rightflank. The officer of the suite ventured to remark to the prince that ifthese battalions went away, the guns would remain without support.Prince Bagration turned to the officer and with his dull eyes looked athim in silence. It seemed to Prince Andrew that the officer's remark wasjust and that really no answer could be made to it. But at that momentan adjutant galloped up with a message from the commander of theregiment in the hollow and news that immense masses of the French werecoming down upon them and that his regiment was in disorder and wasretreating upon the Kiev grenadiers. Prince Bagration bowed his head insign of assent and approval. He rode off at a walk to the right and sentan adjutant to the dragoons with orders to attack the French. But thisadjutant returned half an hour later with the news that the commander ofthe dragoons had already retreated beyond the dip in the ground, as aheavy fire had been opened on him and he was losing men uselessly, andso had hastened to throw some sharpshooters into the wood."Very good!" said Bagration.As he was leaving the battery, firing was heard on the left also, and asit was too far to the left flank for him to have time to go therehimself, Prince Bagration sent Zherkov to tell the general in command(the one who had paraded his regiment before Kutuzov at Braunau) that hemust retreat as quickly as possible behind the hollow in the rear, asthe right flank would probably not be able to withstand the enemy'sattack very long. About Tushin and the battalion that had been insupport of his battery all was forgotten. Prince Andrew listenedattentively to Bagration's colloquies with the commanding officers andthe orders he gave them and, to his surprise, found that no orders werereally given, but that Prince Bagration tried to make it appear thateverything done by necessity, by accident, or by the will of subordinatecommanders was done, if not by his direct command, at least in accordwith his intentions. Prince Andrew noticed, however, that though whathappened was due to chance and was independent of the commander's will,owing to the tact Bagration showed, his presence was very valuable.Officers who approached him with disturbed countenances became calm;soldiers and officers greeted him gaily, grew more cheerful in hispresence, and were evidently anxious to display their courage beforehim.CHAPTER XVIIIPrince Bagration, having reached the highest point of our right flank,began riding downhill to where the roll of musketry was heard but whereon account of the smoke nothing could be seen. The nearer they got tothe hollow the less they could see but the more they felt the nearnessof the actual battlefield. They began to meet wounded men. One with ableeding head and no cap was being dragged along by two soldiers whosupported him under the arms. There was a gurgle in his throat and hewas spitting blood. A bullet had evidently hit him in the throat ormouth. Another was walking sturdily by himself but without his musket,groaning aloud and swinging his arm which had just been hurt, whileblood from it was streaming over his greatcoat as from a bottle. He hadthat moment been wounded and his face showed fear rather than suffering.Crossing a road they descended a steep incline and saw several men lyingon the ground; they also met a crowd of soldiers some of whom wereunwounded. The soldiers were ascending the hill breathing heavily, anddespite the general's presence were talking loudly and gesticulating. Infront of them rows of gray cloaks were already visible through thesmoke, and an officer catching sight of Bagration rushed shouting afterthe crowd of retreating soldiers, ordering them back. Bagration rode upto the ranks along which shots crackled now here and now there, drowningthe sound of voices and the shouts of command. The whole air reeked withsmoke. The excited faces of the soldiers were blackened with it. Somewere using their ramrods, others putting powder on the touchpans ortaking charges from their pouches, while others were firing, though whothey were firing at could not be seen for the smoke which there was nowind to carry away. A pleasant humming and whistling of bullets wereoften heard. "What is this?" thought Prince Andrew approaching the crowdof soldiers. "It can't be an attack, for they are not moving; it can'tbe a square--for they are not drawn up for that."The commander of the regiment, a thin, feeble-looking old man with apleasant smile--his eyelids drooping more than half over his old eyes,giving him a mild expression, rode up to Bagration and welcomed him as ahost welcomes an honored guest. He reported that his regiment had beenattacked by French cavalry and that, though the attack had beenrepulsed, he had lost more than half his men. He said the attack hadbeen repulsed, employing this military term to describe what hadoccurred to his regiment, but in reality he did not himself know whathad happened during that half-hour to the troops entrusted to him, andcould not say with certainty whether the attack had been repulsed or hisregiment had been broken up. All he knew was that at the commencement ofthe action balls and shells began flying all over his regiment andhitting men and that afterwards someone had shouted "Cavalry!" and ourmen had begun firing. They were still firing, not at the cavalry whichhad disappeared, but at French infantry who had come into the hollow andwere firing at our men. Prince Bagration bowed his head as a sign thatthis was exactly what he had desired and expected. Turning to hisadjutant he ordered him to bring down the two battalions of the SixthChasseurs whom they had just passed. Prince Andrew was struck by thechanged expression on Prince Bagration's face at this moment. Itexpressed the concentrated and happy resolution you see on the face of aman who on a hot day takes a final run before plunging into the water.The dull, sleepy expression was no longer there, nor the affectation ofprofound thought. The round, steady, hawk's eyes looked before himeagerly and rather disdainfully, not resting on anything although hismovements were still slow and measured.The commander of the regiment turned to Prince Bagration, entreating himto go back as it was too dangerous to remain where they were. "Please,your excellency, for God's sake!" he kept saying, glancing for supportat an officer of the suite who turned away from him. "There, you see!"and he drew attention to the bullets whistling, singing, and hissingcontinually around them. He spoke in the tone of entreaty and reproachthat a carpenter uses to a gentleman who has picked up an ax: "We areused to it, but you, sir, will blister your hands." He spoke as if thosebullets could not kill him, and his half-closed eyes gave still morepersuasiveness to his words. The staff officer joined in the colonel'sappeals, but Bagration did not reply; he only gave an order to ceasefiring and re-form, so as to give room for the two approachingbattalions. While he was speaking, the curtain of smoke that hadconcealed the hollow, driven by a rising wind, began to move from rightto left as if drawn by an invisible hand, and the hill opposite, withthe French moving about on it, opened out before them. All eyes fastenedinvoluntarily on this French column advancing against them and windingdown over the uneven ground. One could already see the soldiers' shaggycaps, distinguish the officers from the men, and see the standardflapping against its staff."They march splendidly," remarked someone in Bagration's suite.The head of the column had already descended into the hollow. The clashwould take place on this side of it...The remains of our regiment which had been in action rapidly formed upand moved to the right; from behind it, dispersing the laggards, cametwo battalions of the Sixth Chasseurs in fine order. Before they hadreached Bagration, the weighty tread of the mass of men marching in stepcould be heard. On their left flank, nearest to Bagration, marched acompany commander, a fine round-faced man, with a stupid and happyexpression--the same man who had rushed out of the wattle shed. At thatmoment he was clearly thinking of nothing but how dashing a fellow hewould appear as he passed the commander.With the self-satisfaction of a man on parade, he stepped lightly withhis muscular legs as if sailing along, stretching himself to his fullheight without the smallest effort, his ease contrasting with the heavytread of the soldiers who were keeping step with him. He carried closeto his leg a narrow unsheathed sword (small, curved, and not like a realweapon) and looked now at the superior officers and now back at the menwithout losing step, his whole powerful body turning flexibly. It was asif all the powers of his soul were concentrated on passing the commanderin the best possible manner, and feeling that he was doing it well hewas happy. "Left... left... left..." he seemed to repeat to himself ateach alternate step; and in time to this, with stern but varied faces,the wall of soldiers burdened with knapsacks and muskets marched instep, and each one of these hundreds of soldiers seemed to be repeatingto himself at each alternate step, "Left... left... left..." A fat majorskirted a bush, puffing and falling out of step; a soldier who hadfallen behind, his face showing alarm at his defection, ran at a trot,panting to catch up with his company. A cannon ball, cleaving the air,flew over the heads of Bagration and his suite, and fell into the columnto the measure of "Left... left!" "Close up!" came the companycommander's voice in jaunty tones. The soldiers passed in a semicircleround something where the ball had fallen, and an old trooper on theflank, a noncommissioned officer who had stopped beside the dead men,ran to catch up his line and, falling into step with a hop, looked backangrily, and through the ominous silence and the regular tramp of feetbeating the ground in unison, one seemed to hear left... left... left."Well done, lads!" said Prince Bagration."Glad to do our best, your ex'len-lency!" came a confused shout from theranks. A morose soldier marching on the left turned his eyes onBagration as he shouted, with an expression that seemed to say: "We knowthat ourselves!" Another, without looking round, as though fearing torelax, shouted with his mouth wide open and passed on.The order was given to halt and down knapsacks.Bagration rode round the ranks that had marched past him and dismounted.He gave the reins to a Cossack, took off and handed over his felt coat,stretched his legs, and set his cap straight. The head of the Frenchcolumn, with its officers leading, appeared from below the hill."Forward, with God!" said Bagration, in a resolute, sonorous voice,turning for a moment to the front line, and slightly swinging his arms,he went forward uneasily over the rough field with the awkward gait of acavalryman. Prince Andrew felt that an invisible power was leading himforward, and experienced great happiness.The French were already near. Prince Andrew, walking beside Bagration,could clearly distinguish their bandoliers, red epaulets, and even theirfaces. (He distinctly saw an old French officer who, with gaitered legsand turned-out toes, climbed the hill with difficulty.) Prince Bagrationgave no further orders and silently continued to walk on in front of theranks. Suddenly one shot after another rang out from the French, smokeappeared all along their uneven ranks, and musket shots sounded. Severalof our men fell, among them the round-faced officer who had marched sogaily and complacently. But at the moment the first report was heard,Bagration looked round and shouted, "Hurrah!""Hurrah--ah!--ah!" rang a long-drawn shout from our ranks, and passingBagration and racing one another they rushed in an irregular but joyousand eager crowd down the hill at their disordered foe.CHAPTER XIXThe attack of the Sixth Chasseurs secured the retreat of our rightflank. In the center Tushin's forgotten battery, which had managed toset fire to the Schon Grabern village, delayed the French advance. TheFrench were putting out the fire which the wind was spreading, and thusgave us time to retreat. The retirement of the center to the other sideof the dip in the ground at the rear was hurried and noisy, but thedifferent companies did not get mixed. But our left--which consisted ofthe Azov and Podolsk infantry and the Pavlograd hussars--wassimultaneously attacked and outflanked by superior French forces underLannes and was thrown into confusion. Bagration had sent Zherkov to thegeneral commanding that left flank with orders to retreat immediately.Zherkov, not removing his hand from his cap, turned his horse about andgalloped off. But no sooner had he left Bagration than his couragefailed him. He was seized by panic and could not go where it wasdangerous.Having reached the left flank, instead of going to the front where thefiring was, he began to look for the general and his staff where theycould not possibly be, and so did not deliver the order.The command of the left flank belonged by seniority to the commander ofthe regiment Kutuzov had reviewed at Braunau and in which Dolokhov wasserving as a private. But the command of the extreme left flank had beenassigned to the commander of the Pavlograd regiment in which Rostov wasserving, and a misunderstanding arose. The two commanders were muchexasperated with one another and, long after the action had begun on theright flank and the French were already advancing, were engaged indiscussion with the sole object of offending one another. But theregiments, both cavalry and infantry, were by no means ready for theimpending action. From privates to general they were not expecting abattle and were engaged in peaceful occupations, the cavalry feeding thehorses and the infantry collecting wood."He higher iss dan I in rank," said the German colonel of the hussars,flushing and addressing an adjutant who had ridden up, "so let him dowhat he vill, but I cannot sacrifice my hussars... Bugler, sount zeretreat!"But haste was becoming imperative. Cannon and musketry, minglingtogether, thundered on the right and in the center, while the capotes ofLannes' sharpshooters were already seen crossing the milldam and formingup within twice the range of a musket shot. The general in command ofthe infantry went toward his horse with jerky steps, and having mounteddrew himself up very straight and tall and rode to the Pavlogradcommander. The commanders met with polite bows but with secretmalevolence in their hearts."Once again, Colonel," said the general, "I can't leave half my men inthe wood. I beg of you, I beg of you," he repeated, "to occupy theposition and prepare for an attack.""I peg of you yourself not to mix in vot is not your business!" suddenlyreplied the irate colonel. "If you vere in the cavalry...""I am not in the cavalry, Colonel, but I am a Russian general and if youare not aware of the fact...""Quite avare, your excellency," suddenly shouted the colonel, touchinghis horse and turning purple in the face. "Vill you be so goot to cometo ze front and see dat zis position iss no goot? I don't vish todestroy my men for your pleasure!""You forget yourself, Colonel. I am not considering my own pleasure andI won't allow it to be said!"Taking the colonel's outburst as a challenge to his courage, the generalexpanded his chest and rode, frowning, beside him to the front line, asif their differences would be settled there amongst the bullets. Theyreached the front, several bullets sped over them, and they halted insilence. There was nothing fresh to be seen from the line, for fromwhere they had been before it had been evident that it was impossiblefor cavalry to act among the bushes and broken ground, as well as thatthe French were outflanking our left. The general and colonel lookedsternly and significantly at one another like two fighting cockspreparing for battle, each vainly trying to detect signs of cowardice inthe other. Both passed the examination successfully. As there wasnothing to be said, and neither wished to give occasion for it to bealleged that he had been the first to leave the range of fire, theywould have remained there for a long time testing each other's couragehad it not been that just then they heard the rattle of musketry and amuffled shout almost behind them in the wood. The French had attackedthe men collecting wood in the copse. It was no longer possible for thehussars to retreat with the infantry. They were cut off from the line ofretreat on the left by the French. However inconvenient the position, itwas now necessary to attack in order to cut a way through forthemselves.The squadron in which Rostov was serving had scarcely time to mountbefore it was halted facing the enemy. Again, as at the Enns bridge,there was nothing between the squadron and the enemy, and again thatterrible dividing line of uncertainty and fear--resembling the lineseparating the living from the dead--lay between them. All wereconscious of this unseen line, and the question whether they would crossit or not, and how they would cross it, agitated them all.The colonel rode to the front, angrily gave some reply to questions putto him by the officers, and, like a man desperately insisting on havinghis own way, gave an order. No one said anything definite, but the rumorof an attack spread through the squadron. The command to form up rangout and the sabers whizzed as they were drawn from their scabbards.Still no one moved. The troops of the left flank, infantry and hussarsalike, felt that the commander did not himself know what to do, and thisirresolution communicated itself to the men."If only they would be quick!" thought Rostov, feeling that at last thetime had come to experience the joy of an attack of which he had sooften heard from his fellow hussars."Fo'ward, with God, lads!" rang out Denisov's voice. "At a twotfo'ward!"The horses' croups began to sway in the front line. Rook pulled at thereins and started of his own accord.Before him, on the right, Rostov saw the front lines of his hussars andstill farther ahead a dark line which he could not see distinctly buttook to be the enemy. Shots could be heard, but some way off."Faster!" came the word of command, and Rostov felt Rook's flanksdrooping as he broke into a gallop.Rostov anticipated his horse's movements and became more and moreelated. He had noticed a solitary tree ahead of him. This tree had beenin the middle of the line that had seemed so terrible--and now he hadcrossed that line and not only was there nothing terrible, buteverything was becoming more and more happy and animated. "Oh, how Iwill slash at him!" thought Rostov, gripping the hilt of his saber."Hur-a-a-a-ah!" came a roar of voices. "Let anyone come my way now,"thought Rostov driving his spurs into Rook and letting him go at a fullgallop so that he outstripped the others. Ahead, the enemy was alreadyvisible. Suddenly something like a birch broom seemed to sweep over thesquadron. Rostov raised his saber, ready to strike, but at that instantthe trooper Nikitenko, who was galloping ahead, shot away from him, andRostov felt as in a dream that he continued to be carried forward withunnatural speed but yet stayed on the same spot. From behind himBondarchuk, an hussar he knew, jolted against him and looked angrily athim. Bondarchuk's horse swerved and galloped past."How is it I am not moving? I have fallen, I am killed!" Rostov askedand answered at the same instant. He was alone in the middle of a field.Instead of the moving horses and hussars' backs, he saw nothing beforehim but the motionless earth and the stubble around him. There was warmblood under his arm. "No, I am wounded and the horse is killed." Rooktried to rise on his forelegs but fell back, pinning his rider's leg.Blood was flowing from his head; he struggled but could not rise. Rostovalso tried to rise but fell back, his sabretache having become entangledin the saddle. Where our men were, and where the French, he did notknow. There was no one near.Having disentangled his leg, he rose. "Where, on which side, was now theline that had so sharply divided the two armies?" he asked himself andcould not answer. "Can something bad have happened to me?" he wonderedas he got up: and at that moment he felt that something superfluous washanging on his benumbed left arm. The wrist felt as if it were not his.He examined his hand carefully, vainly trying to find blood on it. "Ah,here are people coming," he thought joyfully, seeing some men runningtoward him. "They will help me!" In front came a man wearing a strangeshako and a blue cloak, swarthy, sunburned, and with a hooked nose. Thencame two more, and many more running behind. One of them said somethingstrange, not in Russian. In among the hindmost of these men wearingsimilar shakos was a Russian hussar. He was being held by the arms andhis horse was being led behind him."It must be one of ours, a prisoner. Yes. Can it be that they will takeme too? Who are these men?" thought Rostov, scarcely believing his eyes."Can they be French?" He looked at the approaching Frenchmen, and thoughbut a moment before he had been galloping to get at them and hack themto pieces, their proximity now seemed so awful that he could not believehis eyes. "Who are they? Why are they running? Can they be coming at me?And why? To kill me? Me whom everyone is so fond of?" He remembered hismother's love for him, and his family's, and his friends', and theenemy's intention to kill him seemed impossible. "But perhaps they maydo it!" For more than ten seconds he stood not moving from the spot orrealizing the situation. The foremost Frenchman, the one with the hookednose, was already so close that the expression of his face could beseen. And the excited, alien face of that man, his bayonet hanging down,holding his breath, and running so lightly, frightened Rostov. He seizedhis pistol and, instead of firing it, flung it at the Frenchman and ranwith all his might toward the bushes. He did not now run with thefeeling of doubt and conflict with which he had trodden the Enns bridge,but with the feeling of a hare fleeing from the hounds. One singlesentiment, that of fear for his young and happy life, possessed hiswhole being. Rapidly leaping the furrows, he fled across the field withthe impetuosity he used to show at catchplay, now and then turning hisgood-natured, pale, young face to look back. A shudder of terror wentthrough him: "No, better not look," he thought, but having reached thebushes he glanced round once more. The French had fallen behind, andjust as he looked round the first man changed his run to a walk and,turning, shouted something loudly to a comrade farther back. Rostovpaused. "No, there's some mistake," thought he. "They can't have wantedto kill me." But at the same time, his left arm felt as heavy as if aseventy-pound weight were tied to it. He could run no more. TheFrenchman also stopped and took aim. Rostov closed his eyes and stoopeddown. One bullet and then another whistled past him. He mustered hislast remaining strength, took hold of his left hand with his right, andreached the bushes. Behind these were some Russian sharpshooters.CHAPTER XXThe infantry regiments that had been caught unawares in the outskirts ofthe wood ran out of it, the different companies getting mixed, andretreated as a disorderly crowd. One soldier, in his fear, uttered thesenseless cry, "Cut off!" that is so terrible in battle, and that wordinfected the whole crowd with a feeling of panic."Surrounded! Cut off? We're lost!" shouted the fugitives.The moment he heard the firing and the cry from behind, the generalrealized that something dreadful had happened to his regiment, and thethought that he, an exemplary officer of many years' service who hadnever been to blame, might be held responsible at headquarters fornegligence or inefficiency so staggered him that, forgetting therecalcitrant cavalry colonel, his own dignity as a general, and aboveall quite forgetting the danger and all regard for self-preservation, heclutched the crupper of his saddle and, spurring his horse, galloped tothe regiment under a hail of bullets which fell around, but fortunatelymissed him. His one desire was to know what was happening and at anycost correct, or remedy, the mistake if he had made one, so that he, anexemplary officer of twenty-two years' service, who had never beencensured, should not be held to blame.Having galloped safely through the French, he reached a field behind thecopse across which our men, regardless of orders, were running anddescending the valley. That moment of moral hesitation which decides thefate of battles had arrived. Would this disorderly crowd of soldiersattend to the voice of their commander, or would they, disregarding him,continue their flight? Despite his desperate shouts that used to seem soterrible to the soldiers, despite his furious purple countenancedistorted out of all likeness to his former self, and the flourishing ofhis saber, the soldiers all continued to run, talking, firing into theair, and disobeying orders. The moral hesitation which decided the fateof battles was evidently culminating in a panic.The general had a fit of coughing as a result of shouting and of thepowder smoke and stopped in despair. Everything seemed lost. But at thatmoment the French who were attacking, suddenly and without any apparentreason, ran back and disappeared from the outskirts, and Russiansharpshooters showed themselves in the copse. It was Timokhin's company,which alone had maintained its order in the wood and, having lain inambush in a ditch, now attacked the French unexpectedly. Timokhin, armedonly with a sword, had rushed at the enemy with such a desperate cry andsuch mad, drunken determination that, taken by surprise, the French hadthrown down their muskets and run. Dolokhov, running beside Timokhin,killed a Frenchman at close quarters and was the first to seize thesurrendering French officer by his collar. Our fugitives returned, thebattalions re-formed, and the French who had nearly cut our left flankin half were for the moment repulsed. Our reserve units were able tojoin up, and the fight was at an end. The regimental commander and MajorEkonomov had stopped beside a bridge, letting the retreating companiespass by them, when a soldier came up and took hold of the commander'sstirrup, almost leaning against him. The man was wearing a bluish coatof broadcloth, he had no knapsack or cap, his head was bandaged, andover his shoulder a French munition pouch was slung. He had an officer'ssword in his hand. The soldier was pale, his blue eyes looked impudentlyinto the commander's face, and his lips were smiling. Though thecommander was occupied in giving instructions to Major Ekonomov, hecould not help taking notice of the soldier."Your excellency, here are two trophies," said Dolokhov, pointing to theFrench sword and pouch. "I have taken an officer prisoner. I stopped thecompany." Dolokhov breathed heavily from weariness and spoke in abruptsentences. "The whole company can bear witness. I beg you will rememberthis, your excellency!""All right, all right," replied the commander, and turned to MajorEkonomov.But Dolokhov did not go away; he untied the handkerchief around hishead, pulled it off, and showed the blood congealed on his hair."A bayonet wound. I remained at the front. Remember, your excellency!"Tushin's battery had been forgotten and only at the very end of theaction did Prince Bagration, still hearing the cannonade in the center,send his orderly staff officer, and later Prince Andrew also, to orderthe battery to retire as quickly as possible. When the supports attachedto Tushin's battery had been moved away in the middle of the action bysomeone's order, the battery had continued firing and was only notcaptured by the French because the enemy could not surmise that anyonecould have the effrontery to continue firing from four quite undefendedguns. On the contrary, the energetic action of that battery led theFrench to suppose that here--in the center--the main Russian forces wereconcentrated. Twice they had attempted to attack this point, but on eachoccasion had been driven back by grapeshot from the four isolated gunson the hillock.Soon after Prince Bagration had left him, Tushin had succeeded insetting fire to Schon Grabern."Look at them scurrying! It's burning! Just see the smoke! Fine! Grand!Look at the smoke, the smoke!" exclaimed the artillerymen, brighteningup.All the guns, without waiting for orders, were being fired in thedirection of the conflagration. As if urging each other on, the soldierscried at each shot: "Fine! That's good! Look at it... Grand!" The fire,fanned by the breeze, was rapidly spreading. The French columns that hadadvanced beyond the village went back; but as though in revenge for thisfailure, the enemy placed ten guns to the right of the village and beganfiring them at Tushin's battery.In their childlike glee, aroused by the fire and their luck insuccessfully cannonading the French, our artillerymen only noticed thisbattery when two balls, and then four more, fell among our guns, oneknocking over two horses and another tearing off a munition-wagondriver's leg. Their spirits once roused were, however, not diminished,but only changed character. The horses were replaced by others from areserve gun carriage, the wounded were carried away, and the four gunswere turned against the ten-gun battery. Tushin's companion officer hadbeen killed at the beginning of the engagement and within an hourseventeen of the forty men of the guns' crews had been disabled, but theartillerymen were still as merry and lively as ever. Twice they noticedthe French appearing below them, and then they fired grapeshot at them.Little Tushin, moving feebly and awkwardly, kept telling his orderly to"refill my pipe for that one!" and then, scattering sparks from it, ranforward shading his eyes with his small hand to look at the French."Smack at 'em, lads!" he kept saying, seizing the guns by the wheels andworking the screws himself.Amid the smoke, deafened by the incessant reports which always made himjump, Tushin not taking his pipe from his mouth ran from gun to gun, nowaiming, now counting the charges, now giving orders about replacing deador wounded horses and harnessing fresh ones, and shouting in his feeblevoice, so high pitched and irresolute. His face grew more and moreanimated. Only when a man was killed or wounded did he frown and turnaway from the sight, shouting angrily at the men who, as is always thecase, hesitated about lifting the injured or dead. The soldiers, for themost part handsome fellows and, as is always the case in an artillerycompany, a head and shoulders taller and twice as broad as theirofficer--all looked at their commander like children in an embarrassingsituation, and the expression on his face was invariably reflected ontheirs.Owing to the terrible uproar and the necessity for concentration andactivity, Tushin did not experience the slightest unpleasant sense offear, and the thought that he might be killed or badly wounded neveroccurred to him. On the contrary, he became more and more elated. Itseemed to him that it was a very long time ago, almost a day, since hehad first seen the enemy and fired the first shot, and that the cornerof the field he stood on was well-known and familiar ground. Though hethought of everything, considered everything, and did everything thebest of officers could do in his position, he was in a state akin tofeverish delirium or drunkenness.From the deafening sounds of his own guns around him, the whistle andthud of the enemy's cannon balls, from the flushed and perspiring facesof the crew bustling round the guns, from the sight of the blood of menand horses, from the little puffs of smoke on the enemy's side (alwaysfollowed by a ball flying past and striking the earth, a man, a gun, ahorse), from the sight of all these things a fantastic world of his ownhad taken possession of his brain and at that moment afforded himpleasure. The enemy's guns were in his fancy not guns but pipes fromwhich occasional puffs were blown by an invisible smoker."There... he's puffing again," muttered Tushin to himself, as a smallcloud rose from the hill and was borne in a streak to the left by thewind."Now look out for the ball... we'll throw it back.""What do you want, your honor?" asked an artilleryman, standing closeby, who heard him muttering."Nothing... only a shell..." he answered."Come along, our Matvevna!" he said to himself. "Matvevna" * was thename his fancy gave to the farthest gun of the battery, which was largeand of an old pattern. The French swarming round their guns seemed tohim like ants. In that world, the handsome drunkard Number One of thesecond gun's crew was "uncle"; Tushin looked at him more often than atanyone else and took delight in his every movement. The sound ofmusketry at the foot of the hill, now diminishing, now increasing,seemed like someone's breathing. He listened intently to the ebb andflow of these sounds.* Daughter of Matthew."Ah! Breathing again, breathing!" he muttered to himself.He imagined himself as an enormously tall, powerful man who was throwingcannon balls at the French with both hands."Now then, Matvevna, dear old lady, don't let me down!" he was saying ashe moved from the gun, when a strange, unfamiliar voice called above hishead: "Captain Tushin! Captain!"Tushin turned round in dismay. It was the staff officer who had turnedhim out of the booth at Grunth. He was shouting in a gasping voice:"Are you mad? You have twice been ordered to retreat, and you...""Why are they down on me?" thought Tushin, looking in alarm at hissuperior."I... don't..." he muttered, holding up two fingers to his cap. "I..."But the staff officer did not finish what he wanted to say. A cannonball, flying close to him, caused him to duck and bend over his horse.He paused, and just as he was about to say something more, another ballstopped him. He turned his horse and galloped off."Retire! All to retire!" he shouted from a distance.The soldiers laughed. A moment later, an adjutant arrived with the sameorder.It was Prince Andrew. The first thing he saw on riding up to the spacewhere Tushin's guns were stationed was an unharnessed horse with abroken leg, that lay screaming piteously beside the harnessed horses.Blood was gushing from its leg as from a spring. Among the limbers layseveral dead men. One ball after another passed over as he approachedand he felt a nervous shudder run down his spine. But the mere thoughtof being afraid roused him again. "I cannot be afraid," thought he, anddismounted slowly among the guns. He delivered the order and did notleave the battery. He decided to have the guns removed from theirpositions and withdrawn in his presence. Together with Tushin, steppingacross the bodies and under a terrible fire from the French, he attendedto the removal of the guns."A staff officer was here a minute ago, but skipped off," said anartilleryman to Prince Andrew. "Not like your honor!"Prince Andrew said nothing to Tushin. They were both so busy as to seemnot to notice one another. When having limbered up the only two cannonthat remained uninjured out of the four, they began moving down the hill(one shattered gun and one unicorn were left behind), Prince Andrew rodeup to Tushin."Well, till we meet again..." he said, holding out his hand to Tushin."Good-bye, my dear fellow," said Tushin. "Dear soul! Good-bye, my dearfellow!" and for some unknown reason tears suddenly filled his eyes.CHAPTER XXIThe wind had fallen and black clouds, merging with the powder smoke,hung low over the field of battle on the horizon. It was growing darkand the glow of two conflagrations was the more conspicuous. Thecannonade was dying down, but the rattle of musketry behind and on theright sounded oftener and nearer. As soon as Tushin with his guns,continually driving round or coming upon wounded men, was out of rangeof fire and had descended into the dip, he was met by some of the staff,among them the staff officer and Zherkov, who had been twice sent toTushin's battery but had never reached it. Interrupting one another,they all gave, and transmitted, orders as to how to proceed,reprimanding and reproaching him. Tushin gave no orders, and, silently--fearing to speak because at every word he felt ready to weep withoutknowing why--rode behind on his artillery nag. Though the orders were toabandon the wounded, many of them dragged themselves after troops andbegged for seats on the gun carriages. The jaunty infantry officer whojust before the battle had rushed out of Tushin's wattle shed was laid,with a bullet in his stomach, on "Matvevna's" carriage. At the foot ofthe hill, a pale hussar cadet, supporting one hand with the other, cameup to Tushin and asked for a seat."Captain, for God's sake! I've hurt my arm," he said timidly. "For God'ssake... I can't walk. For God's sake!"It was plain that this cadet had already repeatedly asked for a lift andbeen refused. He asked in a hesitating, piteous voice."Tell them to give me a seat, for God's sake!""Give him a seat," said Tushin. "Lay a cloak for him to sit on, lad," hesaid, addressing his favorite soldier. "And where is the woundedofficer?""He has been set down. He died," replied someone."Help him up. Sit down, dear fellow, sit down! Spread out the cloak,Antonov."The cadet was Rostov. With one hand he supported the other; he was paleand his jaw trembled, shivering feverishly. He was placed on "Matvevna,"the gun from which they had removed the dead officer. The cloak theyspread under him was wet with blood which stained his breeches and arm."What, are you wounded, my lad?" said Tushin, approaching the gun onwhich Rostov sat."No, it's a sprain.""Then what is this blood on the gun carriage?" inquired Tushin."It was the officer, your honor, stained it," answered the artilleryman,wiping away the blood with his coat sleeve, as if apologizing for thestate of his gun.It was all that they could do to get the guns up the rise aided by theinfantry, and having reached the village of Gruntersdorf they halted. Ithad grown so dark that one could not distinguish the uniforms ten pacesoff, and the firing had begun to subside. Suddenly, near by on theright, shouting and firing were again heard. Flashes of shot gleamed inthe darkness. This was the last French attack and was met by soldierswho had sheltered in the village houses. They all rushed out of thevillage again, but Tushin's guns could not move, and the artillerymen,Tushin, and the cadet exchanged silent glances as they awaited theirfate. The firing died down and soldiers, talking eagerly, streamed outof a side street."Not hurt, Petrov?" asked one."We've given it 'em hot, mate! They won't make another push now," saidanother."You couldn't see a thing. How they shot at their own fellows! Nothingcould be seen. Pitch-dark, brother! Isn't there something to drink?"The French had been repulsed for the last time. And again and again inthe complete darkness Tushin's guns moved forward, surrounded by thehumming infantry as by a frame.In the darkness, it seemed as though a gloomy unseen river was flowingalways in one direction, humming with whispers and talk and the sound ofhoofs and wheels. Amid the general rumble, the groans and voices of thewounded were more distinctly heard than any other sound in the darknessof the night. The gloom that enveloped the army was filled with theirgroans, which seemed to melt into one with the darkness of the night.After a while the moving mass became agitated, someone rode past on awhite horse followed by his suite, and said something in passing: "Whatdid he say? Where to, now? Halt, is it? Did he thank us?" came eagerquestions from all sides. The whole moving mass began pressing closertogether and a report spread that they were ordered to halt: evidentlythose in front had halted. All remained where they were in the middle ofthe muddy road.Fires were lighted and the talk became more audible. Captain Tushin,having given orders to his company, sent a soldier to find a dressingstation or a doctor for the cadet, and sat down by a bonfire thesoldiers had kindled on the road. Rostov, too, dragged himself to thefire. From pain, cold, and damp, a feverish shivering shook his wholebody. Drowsiness was irresistibly mastering him, but he kept awake by anexcruciating pain in his arm, for which he could find no satisfactoryposition. He kept closing his eyes and then again looking at the fire,which seemed to him dazzlingly red, and at the feeble, round-shoulderedfigure of Tushin who was sitting cross-legged like a Turk beside him.Tushin's large, kind, intelligent eyes were fixed with sympathy andcommiseration on Rostov, who saw that Tushin with his whole heart wishedto help him but could not.From all sides were heard the footsteps and talk of the infantry, whowere walking, driving past, and settling down all around. The sound ofvoices, the tramping feet, the horses' hoofs moving in mud, thecrackling of wood fires near and afar, merged into one tremulous rumble.It was no longer, as before, a dark, unseen river flowing through thegloom, but a dark sea swelling and gradually subsiding after a storm.Rostov looked at and listened listlessly to what passed before andaround him. An infantryman came to the fire, squatted on his heels, heldhis hands to the blaze, and turned away his face."You don't mind your honor?" he asked Tushin. "I've lost my company,your honor. I don't know where... such bad luck!"With the soldier, an infantry officer with a bandaged cheek came up tothe bonfire, and addressing Tushin asked him to have the guns moved atrifle to let a wagon go past. After he had gone, two soldiers rushed tothe campfire. They were quarreling and fighting desperately, each tryingto snatch from the other a boot they were both holding on to."You picked it up?... I dare say! You're very smart!" one of themshouted hoarsely.Then a thin, pale soldier, his neck bandaged with a bloodstained legband, came up and in angry tones asked the artillerymen for water."Must one die like a dog?" said he.Tushin told them to give the man some water. Then a cheerful soldier ranup, begging a little fire for the infantry."A nice little hot torch for the infantry! Good luck to you, fellowcountrymen. Thanks for the fire--we'll return it with interest," saidhe, carrying away into the darkness a glowing stick.Next came four soldiers, carrying something heavy on a cloak, and passedby the fire. One of them stumbled."Who the devil has put the logs on the road?" snarled he."He's dead--why carry him?" said another."Shut up!"And they disappeared into the darkness with their load."Still aching?" Tushin asked Rostov in a whisper."Yes.""Your honor, you're wanted by the general. He is in the hut here," saida gunner, coming up to Tushin."Coming, friend."Tushin rose and, buttoning his greatcoat and pulling it straight, walkedaway from the fire.Not far from the artillery campfire, in a hut that had been prepared forhim, Prince Bagration sat at dinner, talking with some commandingofficers who had gathered at his quarters. The little old man with thehalf-closed eyes was there greedily gnawing a mutton bone, and thegeneral who had served blamelessly for twenty-two years, flushed by aglass of vodka and the dinner; and the staff officer with the signetring, and Zherkov, uneasily glancing at them all, and Prince Andrew,pale, with compressed lips and feverishly glittering eyes.In a corner of the hut stood a standard captured from the French, andthe accountant with the naive face was feeling its texture, shaking hishead in perplexity--perhaps because the banner really interested him,perhaps because it was hard for him, hungry as he was, to look on at adinner where there was no place for him. In the next hut there was aFrench colonel who had been taken prisoner by our dragoons. Our officerswere flocking in to look at him. Prince Bagration was thanking theindividual commanders and inquiring into details of the action and ourlosses. The general whose regiment had been inspected at Braunau wasinforming the prince that as soon as the action began he had withdrawnfrom the wood, mustered the men who were woodcutting, and, allowing theFrench to pass him, had made a bayonet charge with two battalions andhad broken up the French troops."When I saw, your excellency, that their first battalion wasdisorganized, I stopped in the road and thought: 'I'll let them come onand will meet them with the fire of the whole battalion'--and that'swhat I did."The general had so wished to do this and was so sorry he had not managedto do it that it seemed to him as if it had really happened. Perhaps itmight really have been so? Could one possibly make out amid all thatconfusion what did or did not happen?"By the way, your excellency, I should inform you," he continued--remembering Dolokhov's conversation with Kutuzov and his last interviewwith the gentleman-ranker--"that Private Dolokhov, who was reduced tothe ranks, took a French officer prisoner in my presence andparticularly distinguished himself.""I saw the Pavlograd hussars attack there, your excellency," chimed inZherkov, looking uneasily around. He had not seen the hussars all thatday, but had heard about them from an infantry officer. "They broke uptwo squares, your excellency."Several of those present smiled at Zherkov's words, expecting one of hisusual jokes, but noticing that what he was saying redounded to the gloryof our arms and of the day's work, they assumed a serious expression,though many of them knew that what he was saying was a lie devoid of anyfoundation. Prince Bagration turned to the old colonel:"Gentlemen, I thank you all; all arms have behaved heroically: infantry,cavalry, and artillery. How was it that two guns were abandoned in thecenter?" he inquired, searching with his eyes for someone. (PrinceBagration did not ask about the guns on the left flank; he knew that allthe guns there had been abandoned at the very beginning of the action.)"I think I sent you?" he added, turning to the staff officer on duty."One was damaged," answered the staff officer, "and the other I can'tunderstand. I was there all the time giving orders and had only justleft.... It is true that it was hot there," he added, modestly.Someone mentioned that Captain Tushin was bivouacking close to thevillage and had already been sent for."Oh, but you were there?" said Prince Bagration, addressing PrinceAndrew."Of course, we only just missed one another," said the staff officer,with a smile to Bolkonski."I had not the pleasure of seeing you," said Prince Andrew, coldly andabruptly.All were silent. Tushin appeared at the threshold and made his waytimidly from behind the backs of the generals. As he stepped past thegenerals in the crowded hut, feeling embarrassed as he always was by thesight of his superiors, he did not notice the staff of the banner andstumbled over it. Several of those present laughed."How was it a gun was abandoned?" asked Bagration, frowning, not so muchat the captain as at those who were laughing, among whom Zherkov laughedloudest.Only now, when he was confronted by the stern authorities, did his guiltand the disgrace of having lost two guns and yet remaining alive presentthemselves to Tushin in all their horror. He had been so excited that hehad not thought about it until that moment. The officers' laughterconfused him still more. He stood before Bagration with his lower jawtrembling and was hardly able to mutter: "I don't know... yourexcellency... I had no men... your excellency.""You might have taken some from the covering troops."Tushin did not say that there were no covering troops, though that wasperfectly true. He was afraid of getting some other officer intotrouble, and silently fixed his eyes on Bagration as a schoolboy who hasblundered looks at an examiner.The silence lasted some time. Prince Bagration, apparently not wishingto be severe, found nothing to say; the others did not venture tointervene. Prince Andrew looked at Tushin from under his brows and hisfingers twitched nervously."Your excellency!" Prince Andrew broke the silence with his abruptvoice, "you were pleased to send me to Captain Tushin's battery. I wentthere and found two thirds of the men and horses knocked out, two gunssmashed, and no supports at all."Prince Bagration and Tushin looked with equal intentness at Bolkonski,who spoke with suppressed agitation."And, if your excellency will allow me to express my opinion," hecontinued, "we owe today's success chiefly to the action of that batteryand the heroic endurance of Captain Tushin and his company," and withoutawaiting a reply, Prince Andrew rose and left the table.Prince Bagration looked at Tushin, evidently reluctant to show distrustin Bolkonski's emphatic opinion yet not feeling able fully to credit it,bent his head, and told Tushin that he could go. Prince Andrew went outwith him."Thank you; you saved me, my dear fellow!" said Tushin.Prince Andrew gave him a look, but said nothing and went away. He feltsad and depressed. It was all so strange, so unlike what he had hoped."Who are they? Why are they here? What do they want? And when will allthis end?" thought Rostov, looking at the changing shadows before him.The pain in his arm became more and more intense. Irresistibledrowsiness overpowered him, red rings danced before his eyes, and theimpression of those voices and faces and a sense of loneliness mergedwith the physical pain. It was they, these soldiers--wounded andunwounded--it was they who were crushing, weighing down, and twistingthe sinews and scorching the flesh of his sprained arm and shoulder. Torid himself of them he closed his eyes.For a moment he dozed, but in that short interval innumerable thingsappeared to him in a dream: his mother and her large white hand, Sonya'sthin little shoulders, Natasha's eyes and laughter, Denisov with hisvoice and mustache, and Telyanin and all that affair with Telyanin andBogdanich. That affair was the same thing as this soldier with the harshvoice, and it was that affair and this soldier that were so agonizingly,incessantly pulling and pressing his arm and always dragging it in onedirection. He tried to get away from them, but they would not for aninstant let his shoulder move a hair's breadth. It would not ache--itwould be well--if only they did not pull it, but it was impossible toget rid of them.He opened his eyes and looked up. The black canopy of night hung lessthan a yard above the glow of the charcoal. Flakes of falling snow werefluttering in that light. Tushin had not returned, the doctor had notcome. He was alone now, except for a soldier who was sitting naked atthe other side of the fire, warming his thin yellow body."Nobody wants me!" thought Rostov. "There is no one to help me or pityme. Yet I was once at home, strong, happy, and loved." He sighed and,doing so, groaned involuntarily."Eh, is anything hurting you?" asked the soldier, shaking his shirt outover the fire, and not waiting for an answer he gave a grunt and added:"What a lot of men have been crippled today--frightful!"Rostov did not listen to the soldier. He looked at the snowflakesfluttering above the fire and remembered a Russian winter at his warm,bright home, his fluffy fur coat, his quickly gliding sleigh, hishealthy body, and all the affection and care of his family. "And why didI come here?" he wondered.Next day the French army did not renew their attack, and the remnant ofBagration's detachment was reunited to Kutuzov's army.BOOK THREE: 1805CHAPTER IPrince Vasili was not a man who deliberately thought out his plans.Still less did he think of injuring anyone for his own advantage. He wasmerely a man of the world who had got on and to whom getting on hadbecome a habit. Schemes and devices for which he never rightly accountedto himself, but which formed the whole interest of his life, wereconstantly shaping themselves in his mind, arising from thecircumstances and persons he met. Of these plans he had not merely oneor two in his head but dozens, some only beginning to form themselves,some approaching achievement, and some in course of disintegration. Hedid not, for instance, say to himself: "This man now has influence, Imust gain his confidence and friendship and through him obtain a specialgrant." Nor did he say to himself: "Pierre is a rich man, I must enticehim to marry my daughter and lend me the forty thousand rubles I need."But when he came across a man of position his instinct immediately toldhim that this man could be useful, and without any premeditation PrinceVasili took the first opportunity to gain his confidence, flatter him,become intimate with him, and finally make his request.He had Pierre at hand in Moscow and procured for him an appointment asGentleman of the Bedchamber, which at that time conferred the status ofCouncilor of State, and insisted on the young man accompanying him toPetersburg and staying at his house. With apparent absent-mindedness,yet with unhesitating assurance that he was doing the right thing,Prince Vasili did everything to get Pierre to marry his daughter. Had hethought out his plans beforehand he could not have been so natural andshown such unaffected familiarity in intercourse with everybody bothabove and below him in social standing. Something always drew him towardthose richer and more powerful than himself and he had rare skill inseizing the most opportune moment for making use of people.Pierre, on unexpectedly becoming Count Bezukhov and a rich man, felthimself after his recent loneliness and freedom from cares so beset andpreoccupied that only in bed was he able to be by himself. He had tosign papers, to present himself at government offices, the purpose ofwhich was not clear to him, to question his chief steward, to visit hisestate near Moscow, and to receive many people who formerly did not evenwish to know of his existence but would now have been offended andgrieved had he chosen not to see them. These different people--businessmen, relations, and acquaintances alike--were all disposed totreat the young heir in the most friendly and flattering manner: theywere all evidently firmly convinced of Pierre's noble qualities. He wasalways hearing such words as: "With your remarkable kindness," or, "Withyour excellent heart," "You are yourself so honorable Count," or, "Werehe as clever as you," and so on, till he began sincerely to believe inhis own exceptional kindness and extraordinary intelligence, the more soas in the depth of his heart it had always seemed to him that he reallywas very kind and intelligent. Even people who had formerly beenspiteful toward him and evidently unfriendly now became gentle andaffectionate. The angry eldest princess, with the long waist and hairplastered down like a doll's, had come into Pierre's room after thefuneral. With drooping eyes and frequent blushes she told him she wasvery sorry about their past misunderstandings and did not now feel shehad a right to ask him for anything, except only for permission, afterthe blow she had received, to remain for a few weeks longer in the houseshe so loved and where she had sacrificed so much. She could not refrainfrom weeping at these words. Touched that this statuesque princess couldso change, Pierre took her hand and begged her forgiveness, withoutknowing what for. From that day the eldest princess quite changed towardPierre and began knitting a striped scarf for him."Do this for my sake, mon cher; after all, she had to put up with agreat deal from the deceased," said Prince Vasili to him, handing him adeed to sign for the princess' benefit.Prince Vasili had come to the conclusion that it was necessary to throwthis bone--a bill for thirty thousand rubles--to the poor princess thatit might not occur to her to speak of his share in the affair of theinlaid portfolio. Pierre signed the deed and after that the princessgrew still kinder. The younger sisters also became affectionate to him,especially the youngest, the pretty one with the mole, who often madehim feel confused by her smiles and her own confusion when meeting him.It seemed so natural to Pierre that everyone should like him, and itwould have seemed so unnatural had anyone disliked him, that he couldnot but believe in the sincerity of those around him. Besides, he had notime to ask himself whether these people were sincere or not. He wasalways busy and always felt in a state of mild and cheerfulintoxication. He felt as though he were the center of some important andgeneral movement; that something was constantly expected of him, that ifhe did not do it he would grieve and disappoint many people, but if hedid this and that, all would be well; and he did what was demanded ofhim, but still that happy result always remained in the future.More than anyone else, Prince Vasili took possession of Pierre's affairsand of Pierre himself in those early days. From the death of CountBezukhov he did not let go his hold of the lad. He had the air of a manoppressed by business, weary and suffering, who yet would not, forpity's sake, leave this helpless youth who, after all, was the son ofhis old friend and the possessor of such enormous wealth, to the capriceof fate and the designs of rogues. During the few days he spent inMoscow after the death of Count Bezukhov, he would call Pierre, or go tohim himself, and tell him what ought to be done in a tone of wearinessand assurance, as if he were adding every time: "You know I amoverwhelmed with business and it is purely out of charity that I troublemyself about you, and you also know quite well that what I propose isthe only thing possible.""Well, my dear fellow, tomorrow we are off at last," said Prince Vasilione day, closing his eyes and fingering Pierre's elbow, speaking as ifhe were saying something which had long since been agreed upon and couldnot now be altered. "We start tomorrow and I'm giving you a place in mycarriage. I am very glad. All our important business here is nowsettled, and I ought to have been off long ago. Here is something I havereceived from the chancellor. I asked him for you, and you have beenentered in the diplomatic corps and made a Gentleman of the Bedchamber.The diplomatic career now lies open before you."Notwithstanding the tone of wearied assurance with which these wordswere pronounced, Pierre, who had so long been considering his career,wished to make some suggestion. But Prince Vasili interrupted him in thespecial deep cooing tone, precluding the possibility of interrupting hisspeech, which he used in extreme cases when special persuasion wasneeded."Mais, mon cher, I did this for my own sake, to satisfy my conscience,and there is nothing to thank me for. No one has ever complained yet ofbeing too much loved; and besides, you are free, you could throw it uptomorrow. But you will see everything for yourself when you get toPetersburg. It is high time for you to get away from these terriblerecollections." Prince Vasili sighed. "Yes, yes, my boy. And my valetcan go in your carriage. Ah! I was nearly forgetting," he added. "Youknow, mon cher, your father and I had some accounts to settle, so I havereceived what was due from the Ryazan estate and will keep it; you won'trequire it. We'll go into the accounts later."By "what was due from the Ryazan estate" Prince Vasili meant severalthousand rubles quitrent received from Pierre's peasants, which theprince had retained for himself.In Petersburg, as in Moscow, Pierre found the same atmosphere ofgentleness and affection. He could not refuse the post, or rather therank (for he did nothing), that Prince Vasili had procured for him, andacquaintances, invitations, and social occupations were so numerousthat, even more than in Moscow, he felt a sense of bewilderment, bustle,and continual expectation of some good, always in front of him but neverattained.Of his former bachelor acquaintances many were no longer in Petersburg.The Guards had gone to the front; Dolokhov had been reduced to theranks; Anatole was in the army somewhere in the provinces; Prince Andrewwas abroad; so Pierre had not the opportunity to spend his nights as heused to like to spend them, or to open his mind by intimate talks with afriend older than himself and whom he respected. His whole time wastaken up with dinners and balls and was spent chiefly at Prince Vasili'shouse in the company of the stout princess, his wife, and his beautifuldaughter Helene.Like the others, Anna Pavlovna Scherer showed Pierre the change ofattitude toward him that had taken place in society.Formerly in Anna Pavlovna's presence, Pierre had always felt that whathe was saying was out of place, tactless and unsuitable, that remarkswhich seemed to him clever while they formed in his mind became foolishas soon as he uttered them, while on the contrary Hippolyte's stupidestremarks came out clever and apt. Now everything Pierre said wascharmant. Even if Anna Pavlovna did not say so, he could see that shewished to and only refrained out of regard for his modesty.In the beginning of the winter of 1805-6 Pierre received one of AnnaPavlovna's usual pink notes with an invitation to which was added: "Youwill find the beautiful Helene here, whom it is always delightful tosee."When he read that sentence, Pierre felt for the first time that somelink which other people recognized had grown up between himself andHelene, and that thought both alarmed him, as if some obligation werebeing imposed on him which he could not fulfill, and pleased him as anentertaining supposition.Anna Pavlovna's "At Home" was like the former one, only the novelty sheoffered her guests this time was not Mortemart, but a diplomatist freshfrom Berlin with the very latest details of the Emperor Alexander'svisit to Potsdam, and of how the two august friends had pledgedthemselves in an indissoluble alliance to uphold the cause of justiceagainst the enemy of the human race. Anna Pavlovna received Pierre witha shade of melancholy, evidently relating to the young man's recent lossby the death of Count Bezukhov (everyone constantly considered it a dutyto assure Pierre that he was greatly afflicted by the death of thefather he had hardly known), and her melancholy was just like the augustmelancholy she showed at the mention of her most august Majesty theEmpress Marya Fedorovna. Pierre felt flattered by this. Anna Pavlovnaarranged the different groups in her drawing room with her habitualskill. The large group, in which were Prince Vasili and the generals,had the benefit of the diplomat. Another group was at the tea table.Pierre wished to join the former, but Anna Pavlovna--who was in theexcited condition of a commander on a battlefield to whom thousands ofnew and brilliant ideas occur which there is hardly time to put inaction--seeing Pierre, touched his sleeve with her finger, saying:"Wait a bit, I have something in view for you this evening." (Sheglanced at Helene and smiled at her.) "My dear Helene, be charitable tomy poor aunt who adores you. Go and keep her company for ten minutes.And that it will not be too dull, here is the dear count who will notrefuse to accompany you."The beauty went to the aunt, but Anna Pavlovna detained Pierre, lookingas if she had to give some final necessary instructions."Isn't she exquisite?" she said to Pierre, pointing to the statelybeauty as she glided away. "And how she carries herself! For so young agirl, such tact, such masterly perfection of manner! It comes from herheart. Happy the man who wins her! With her the least worldly of menwould occupy a most brilliant position in society. Don't you think so? Ionly wanted to know your opinion," and Anna Pavlovna let Pierre go.Pierre, in reply, sincerely agreed with her as to Helene's perfection ofmanner. If he ever thought of Helene, it was just of her beauty and herremarkable skill in appearing silently dignified in society.The old aunt received the two young people in her corner, but seemeddesirous of hiding her adoration for Helene and inclined rather to showher fear of Anna Pavlovna. She looked at her niece, as if inquiring whatshe was to do with these people. On leaving them, Anna Pavlovna againtouched Pierre's sleeve, saying: "I hope you won't say that it is dullin my house again," and she glanced at Helene.Helene smiled, with a look implying that she did not admit thepossibility of anyone seeing her without being enchanted. The auntcoughed, swallowed, and said in French that she was very pleased to seeHelene, then she turned to Pierre with the same words of welcome and thesame look. In the middle of a dull and halting conversation, Heleneturned to Pierre with the beautiful bright smile that she gave toeveryone. Pierre was so used to that smile, and it had so little meaningfor him, that he paid no attention to it. The aunt was just speaking ofa collection of snuffboxes that had belonged to Pierre's father, CountBezukhov, and showed them her own box. Princess Helene asked to see theportrait of the aunt's husband on the box lid."That is probably the work of Vinesse," said Pierre, mentioning acelebrated miniaturist, and he leaned over the table to take thesnuffbox while trying to hear what was being said at the other table.He half rose, meaning to go round, but the aunt handed him the snuffbox,passing it across Helene's back. Helene stooped forward to make room,and looked round with a smile. She was, as always at evening parties,wearing a dress such as was then fashionable, cut very low at front andback. Her bust, which had always seemed like marble to Pierre, was soclose to him that his shortsighted eyes could not but perceive theliving charm of her neck and shoulders, so near to his lips that he needonly have bent his head a little to have touched them. He was consciousof the warmth of her body, the scent of perfume, and the creaking of hercorset as she moved. He did not see her marble beauty forming a completewhole with her dress, but all the charm of her body only covered by hergarments. And having once seen this he could not help being aware of it,just as we cannot renew an illusion we have once seen through."So you have never noticed before how beautiful I am?" Helene seemed tosay. "You had not noticed that I am a woman? Yes, I am a woman who maybelong to anyone--to you too," said her glance. And at that momentPierre felt that Helene not only could, but must, be his wife, and thatit could not be otherwise.He knew this at that moment as surely as if he had been standing at thealtar with her. How and when this would be he did not know, he did noteven know if it would be a good thing (he even felt, he knew not why,that it would be a bad thing), but he knew it would happen.Pierre dropped his eyes, lifted them again, and wished once more to seeher as a distant beauty far removed from him, as he had seen her everyday until then, but he could no longer do it. He could not, any morethan a man who has been looking at a tuft of steppe grass through themist and taking it for a tree can again take it for a tree after he hasonce recognized it to be a tuft of grass. She was terribly close to him.She already had power over him, and between them there was no longer anybarrier except the barrier of his own will."Well, I will leave you in your little corner," came Anna Pavlovna'svoice, "I see you are all right there."And Pierre, anxiously trying to remember whether he had done anythingreprehensible, looked round with a blush. It seemed to him that everyoneknew what had happened to him as he knew it himself.A little later when he went up to the large circle, Anna Pavlovna saidto him: "I hear you are refitting your Petersburg house?"This was true. The architect had told him that it was necessary, andPierre, without knowing why, was having his enormous Petersburg housedone up."That's a good thing, but don't move from Prince Vasili's. It is good tohave a friend like the prince," she said, smiling at Prince Vasili. "Iknow something about that. Don't I? And you are still so young. You needadvice. Don't be angry with me for exercising an old woman's privilege."She paused, as women always do, expecting something after they havementioned their age. "If you marry it will be a different thing," shecontinued, uniting them both in one glance. Pierre did not look atHelene nor she at him. But she was just as terribly close to him. Hemuttered something and colored.When he got home he could not sleep for a long time for thinking of whathad happened. What had happened? Nothing. He had merely understood thatthe woman he had known as a child, of whom when her beauty was mentionedhe had said absent-mindedly: "Yes, she's good looking," he hadunderstood that this woman might belong to him."But she's stupid. I have myself said she is stupid," he thought. "Thereis something nasty, something wrong, in the feeling she excites in me. Ihave been told that her brother Anatole was in love with her and shewith him, that there was quite a scandal and that that's why he was sentaway. Hippolyte is her brother... Prince Vasili is her father... It'sbad...." he reflected, but while he was thinking this (the reflectionwas still incomplete), he caught himself smiling and was conscious thatanother line of thought had sprung up, and while thinking of herworthlessness he was also dreaming of how she would be his wife, how shewould love him become quite different, and how all he had thought andheard of her might be false. And he again saw her not as the daughter ofPrince Vasili, but visualized her whole body only veiled by its graydress. "But no! Why did this thought never occur to me before?" andagain he told himself that it was impossible, that there would besomething unnatural, and as it seemed to him dishonorable, in thismarriage. He recalled her former words and looks and the words and looksof those who had seen them together. He recalled Anna Pavlovna's wordsand looks when she spoke to him about his house, recalled thousands ofsuch hints from Prince Vasili and others, and was seized by terror lesthe had already, in some way, bound himself to do something that wasevidently wrong and that he ought not to do. But at the very time he wasexpressing this conviction to himself, in another part of his mind herimage rose in all its womanly beauty.CHAPTER IIIn November, 1805, Prince Vasili had to go on a tour of inspection infour different provinces. He had arranged this for himself so as tovisit his neglected estates at the same time and pick up his son Anatolewhere his regiment was stationed, and take him to visit Prince NicholasBolkonski in order to arrange a match for him with the daughter of thatrich old man. But before leaving home and undertaking these new affairs,Prince Vasili had to settle matters with Pierre, who, it is true, hadlatterly spent whole days at home, that is, in Prince Vasili's housewhere he was staying, and had been absurd, excited, and foolish inHelene's presence (as a lover should be), but had not yet proposed toher."This is all very fine, but things must be settled," said Prince Vasilito himself, with a sorrowful sigh, one morning, feeling that Pierre whowas under such obligations to him ("But never mind that") was notbehaving very well in this matter. "Youth, frivolity... well, God bewith him," thought he, relishing his own goodness of heart, "but it mustbe brought to a head. The day after tomorrow will be Lelya's name day. Iwill invite two or three people, and if he does not understand what heought to do then it will be my affair--yes, my affair. I am her father."Six weeks after Anna Pavlovna's "At Home" and after the sleepless nightwhen he had decided that to marry Helene would be a calamity and that heought to avoid her and go away, Pierre, despite that decision, had notleft Prince Vasili's and felt with terror that in people's eyes he wasevery day more and more connected with her, that it was impossible forhim to return to his former conception of her, that he could not breakaway from her, and that though it would be a terrible thing he wouldhave to unite his fate with hers. He might perhaps have been able tofree himself but that Prince Vasili (who had rarely before givenreceptions) now hardly let a day go by without having an evening partyat which Pierre had to be present unless he wished to spoil the generalpleasure and disappoint everyone's expectation. Prince Vasili, in therare moments when he was at home, would take Pierre's hand in passingand draw it downwards, or absent-mindedly hold out his wrinkled, clean-shaven cheek for Pierre to kiss and would say: "Till tomorrow," or, "Bein to dinner or I shall not see you," or, "I am staying in for yoursake," and so on. And though Prince Vasili, when he stayed in (as hesaid) for Pierre's sake, hardly exchanged a couple of words with him,Pierre felt unable to disappoint him. Every day he said to himself oneand the same thing: "It is time I understood her and made up my mindwhat she really is. Was I mistaken before, or am I mistaken now? No, sheis not stupid, she is an excellent girl," he sometimes said to himself"she never makes a mistake, never says anything stupid. She says little,but what she does say is always clear and simple, so she is not stupid.She never was abashed and is not abashed now, so she cannot be a badwoman!" He had often begun to make reflections or think aloud in hercompany, and she had always answered him either by a brief butappropriate remark--showing that it did not interest her--or by a silentlook and smile which more palpably than anything else showed Pierre hersuperiority. She was right in regarding all arguments as nonsense incomparison with that smile.She always addressed him with a radiantly confiding smile meant for himalone, in which there was something more significant than in the generalsmile that usually brightened her face. Pierre knew that everyone waswaiting for him to say a word and cross a certain line, and he knew thatsooner or later he would step across it, but an incomprehensible terrorseized him at the thought of that dreadful step. A thousand times duringthat month and a half while he felt himself drawn nearer and nearer tothat dreadful abyss, Pierre said to himself: "What am I doing? I needresolution. Can it be that I have none?"He wished to take a decision, but felt with dismay that in this matterhe lacked that strength of will which he had known in himself and reallypossessed. Pierre was one of those who are only strong when they feelthemselves quite innocent, and since that day when he was overpowered bya feeling of desire while stooping over the snuffbox at Anna Pavlovna's,an unacknowledged sense of the guilt of that desire paralyzed his will.On Helene's name day, a small party of just their own people--as hiswife said--met for supper at Prince Vasili's. All these friends andrelations had been given to understand that the fate of the young girlwould be decided that evening. The visitors were seated at supper.Princess Kuragina, a portly imposing woman who had once been handsome,was sitting at the head of the table. On either side of her sat the moreimportant guests--an old general and his wife, and Anna PavlovnaScherer. At the other end sat the younger and less important guests, andthere too sat the members of the family, and Pierre and Helene, side byside. Prince Vasili was not having any supper: he went round the tablein a merry mood, sitting down now by one, now by another, of the guests.To each of them he made some careless and agreeable remark except toPierre and Helene, whose presence he seemed not to notice. He enlivenedthe whole party. The wax candles burned brightly, the silver and crystalgleamed, so did the ladies' toilets and the gold and silver of the men'sepaulets; servants in scarlet liveries moved round the table, theclatter of plates, knives, and glasses mingled with the animated hum ofseveral conversations. At one end of the table, the old chamberlain washeard assuring an old baroness that he loved her passionately, at whichshe laughed; at the other could be heard the story of the misfortunes ofsome Mary Viktorovna or other. At the center of the table, Prince Vasiliattracted everybody's attention. With a facetious smile on his face, hewas telling the ladies about last Wednesday's meeting of the ImperialCouncil, at which Sergey Kuzmich Vyazmitinov, the new military governorgeneral of Petersburg, had received and read the then famous rescript ofthe Emperor Alexander from the army to Sergey Kuzmich, in which theEmperor said that he was receiving from all sides declarations of thepeople's loyalty, that the declaration from Petersburg gave himparticular pleasure, and that he was proud to be at the head of such anation and would endeavor to be worthy of it. This rescript began withthe words: "Sergey Kuzmich, From all sides reports reach me," etc."Well, and so he never got farther than: 'Sergey Kuzmich'?" asked one ofthe ladies."Exactly, not a hair's breadth farther," answered Prince Vasili,laughing, "'Sergey Kuzmich... From all sides... From all sides... SergeyKuzmich...' Poor Vyazmitinov could not get any farther! He began therescript again and again, but as soon as he uttered 'Sergey' he sobbed,'Kuz-mi-ch,' tears, and 'From all sides' was smothered in sobs and hecould get no farther. And again his handkerchief, and again: 'SergeyKuzmich, From all sides,'... and tears, till at last somebody else wasasked to read it.""Kuzmich... From all sides... and then tears," someone repeatedlaughing."Don't be unkind," cried Anna Pavlovna from her end of the table holdingup a threatening finger. "He is such a worthy and excellent man, ourdear Vyazmitinov...."Everybody laughed a great deal. At the head of the table, where thehonored guests sat, everyone seemed to be in high spirits and under theinfluence of a variety of exciting sensations. Only Pierre and Helenesat silently side by side almost at the bottom of the table, asuppressed smile brightening both their faces, a smile that had nothingto do with Sergey Kuzmich--a smile of bashfulness at their own feelings.But much as all the rest laughed, talked, and joked, much as theyenjoyed their Rhine wine, saute, and ices, and however they avoidedlooking at the young couple, and heedless and unobservant as they seemedof them, one could feel by the occasional glances they gave that thestory about Sergey Kuzmich, the laughter, and the food were all apretense, and that the whole attention of that company was directed to--Pierre and Helene. Prince Vasili mimicked the sobbing of Sergey Kuzmichand at the same time his eyes glanced toward his daughter, and while helaughed the expression on his face clearly said: "Yes... it's gettingon, it will all be settled today." Anna Pavlovna threatened him onbehalf of "our dear Vyazmitinov," and in her eyes, which, for aninstant, glanced at Pierre, Prince Vasili read a congratulation on hisfuture son-in-law and on his daughter's happiness. The old princesssighed sadly as she offered some wine to the old lady next to her andglanced angrily at her daughter, and her sigh seemed to say: "Yes,there's nothing left for you and me but to sip sweet wine, my dear, nowthat the time has come for these young ones to be thus boldly,provocatively happy." "And what nonsense all this is that I am saying!"thought a diplomatist, glancing at the happy faces of the lovers."That's happiness!"Into the insignificant, trifling, and artificial interests uniting thatsociety had entered the simple feeling of the attraction of a healthyand handsome young man and woman for one another. And this human feelingdominated everything else and soared above all their affected chatter.Jests fell flat, news was not interesting, and the animation wasevidently forced. Not only the guests but even the footmen waiting attable seemed to feel this, and they forgot their duties as they lookedat the beautiful Helene with her radiant face and at the red, broad, andhappy though uneasy face of Pierre. It seemed as if the very light ofthe candles was focused on those two happy faces alone.Pierre felt that he was the center of it all, and this both pleased andembarrassed him. He was like a man entirely absorbed in some occupation.He did not see, hear, or understand anything clearly. Only now and thendetached ideas and impressions from the world of reality shotunexpectedly through his mind."So it is all finished!" he thought. "And how has it all happened? Howquickly! Now I know that not because of her alone, nor of myself alone,but because of everyone, it must inevitably come about. They are allexpecting it, they are so sure that it will happen that I cannot, Icannot, disappoint them. But how will it be? I do not know, but it willcertainly happen!" thought Pierre, glancing at those dazzling shouldersclose to his eyes.Or he would suddenly feel ashamed of he knew not what. He felt itawkward to attract everyone's attention and to be considered a lucky manand, with his plain face, to be looked on as a sort of Paris possessedof a Helen. "But no doubt it always is and must be so!" he consoledhimself. "And besides, what have I done to bring it about? How did itbegin? I traveled from Moscow with Prince Vasili. Then there wasnothing. So why should I not stay at his house? Then I played cards withher and picked up her reticule and drove out with her. How did it begin,when did it all come about?" And here he was sitting by her side as herbetrothed, seeing, hearing, feeling her nearness, her breathing, hermovements, her beauty. Then it would suddenly seem to him that it wasnot she but he was so unusually beautiful, and that that was why theyall looked so at him, and flattered by this general admiration he wouldexpand his chest, raise his head, and rejoice at his good fortune.Suddenly he heard a familiar voice repeating something to him a secondtime. But Pierre was so absorbed that he did not understand what wassaid."I am asking you when you last heard from Bolkonski," repeated PrinceVasili a third time. "How absent-minded you are, my dear fellow."Prince Vasili smiled, and Pierre noticed that everyone was smiling athim and Helene. "Well, what of it, if you all know it?" thought Pierre."What of it? It's the truth!" and he himself smiled his gentle childlikesmile, and Helene smiled too."When did you get the letter? Was it from Olmutz?" repeated PrinceVasili, who pretended to want to know this in order to settle a dispute."How can one talk or think of such trifles?" thought Pierre."Yes, from Olmutz," he answered, with a sigh.After supper Pierre with his partner followed the others into thedrawing room. The guests began to disperse, some without taking leave ofHelene. Some, as if unwilling to distract her from an importantoccupation, came up to her for a moment and made haste to go away,refusing to let her see them off. The diplomatist preserved a mournfulsilence as he left the drawing room. He pictured the vanity of hisdiplomatic career in comparison with Pierre's happiness. The old generalgrumbled at his wife when she asked how his leg was. "Oh, the old fool,"he thought. "That Princess Helene will be beautiful still when she'sfifty.""I think I may congratulate you," whispered Anna Pavlovna to the oldprincess, kissing her soundly. "If I hadn't this headache I'd havestayed longer."The old princess did not reply, she was tormented by jealousy of herdaughter's happiness.While the guests were taking their leave Pierre remained for a long timealone with Helene in the little drawing room where they were sitting. Hehad often before, during the last six weeks, remained alone with her,but had never spoken to her of love. Now he felt that it was inevitable,but he could not make up his mind to take the final step. He feltashamed; he felt that he was occupying someone else's place here besideHelene. "This happiness is not for you," some inner voice whispered tohim. "This happiness is for those who have not in them what there is inyou."But, as he had to say something, he began by asking her whether she wassatisfied with the party. She replied in her usual simple manner thatthis name day of hers had been one of the pleasantest she had ever had.Some of the nearest relatives had not yet left. They were sitting in thelarge drawing room. Prince Vasili came up to Pierre with languidfootsteps. Pierre rose and said it was getting late. Prince Vasili gavehim a look of stern inquiry, as though what Pierre had just said was sostrange that one could not take it in. But then the expression ofseverity changed, and he drew Pierre's hand downwards, made him sitdown, and smiled affectionately."Well, Lelya?" he asked, turning instantly to his daughter andaddressing her with the careless tone of habitual tenderness natural toparents who have petted their children from babyhood, but which PrinceVasili had only acquired by imitating other parents.And he again turned to Pierre."Sergey Kuzmich--From all sides-" he said, unbuttoning the top button ofhis waistcoat.Pierre smiled, but his smile showed that he knew it was not the storyabout Sergey Kuzmich that interested Prince Vasili just then, and PrinceVasili saw that Pierre knew this. He suddenly muttered something andwent away. It seemed to Pierre that even the prince was disconcerted.The sight of the discomposure of that old man of the world touchedPierre: he looked at Helene and she too seemed disconcerted, and herlook seemed to say: "Well, it is your own fault.""The step must be taken but I cannot, I cannot!" thought Pierre, and heagain began speaking about indifferent matters, about Sergey Kuzmich,asking what the point of the story was as he had not heard it properly.Helene answered with a smile that she too had missed it.When Prince Vasili returned to the drawing room, the princess, his wife,was talking in low tones to the elderly lady about Pierre."Of course, it is a very brilliant match, but happiness, my dear...""Marriages are made in heaven," replied the elderly lady.Prince Vasili passed by, seeming not to hear the ladies, and sat down ona sofa in a far corner of the room. He closed his eyes and seemed to bedozing. His head sank forward and then he roused himself."Aline," he said to his wife, "go and see what they are about."The princess went up to the door, passed by it with a dignified andindifferent air, and glanced into the little drawing room. Pierre andHelene still sat talking just as before."Still the same," she said to her husband.Prince Vasili frowned, twisting his mouth, his cheeks quivered and hisface assumed the coarse, unpleasant expression peculiar to him. Shakinghimself, he rose, threw back his head, and with resolute steps went pastthe ladies into the little drawing room. With quick steps he wentjoyfully up to Pierre. His face was so unusually triumphant that Pierrerose in alarm on seeing it."Thank God!" said Prince Vasili. "My wife has told me everything!" (Heput one arm around Pierre and the other around his daughter.)--"My dearboy... Lelya... I am very pleased." (His voice trembled.) "I loved yourfather... and she will make you a good wife... God bless you!..."He embraced his daughter, and then again Pierre, and kissed him with hismalodorous mouth. Tears actually moistened his cheeks."Princess, come here!" he shouted.The old princess came in and also wept. The elderly lady was using herhandkerchief too. Pierre was kissed, and he kissed the beautifulHelene's hand several times. After a while they were left alone again."All this had to be and could not be otherwise," thought Pierre, "so itis useless to ask whether it is good or bad. It is good because it'sdefinite and one is rid of the old tormenting doubt." Pierre held thehand of his betrothed in silence, looking at her beautiful bosom as itrose and fell."Helene!" he said aloud and paused."Something special is always said in such cases," he thought, but couldnot remember what it was that people say. He looked at her face. Shedrew nearer to him. Her face flushed."Oh, take those off... those..." she said, pointing to his spectacles.Pierre took them off, and his eyes, besides the strange look eyes havefrom which spectacles have just been removed, had also a frightened andinquiring look. He was about to stoop over her hand and kiss it, butwith a rapid, almost brutal movement of her head, she intercepted hislips and met them with her own. Her face struck Pierre, by its altered,unpleasantly excited expression."It is too late now, it's done; besides I love her," thought Pierre."Je vous aime!" * he said, remembering what has to be said at suchmoments: but his words sounded so weak that he felt ashamed of himself.* "I love you."Six weeks later he was married, and settled in Count Bezukhov's large,newly furnished Petersburg house, the happy possessor, as people said,of a wife who was a celebrated beauty and of millions of money.CHAPTER IIIOld Prince Nicholas Bolkonski received a letter from Prince Vasili inNovember, 1805, announcing that he and his son would be paying him avisit. "I am starting on a journey of inspection, and of course I shallthink nothing of an extra seventy miles to come and see you at the sametime, my honored benefactor," wrote Prince Vasili. "My son Anatole isaccompanying me on his way to the army, so I hope you will allow himpersonally to express the deep respect that, emulating his father, hefeels for you.""It seems that there will be no need to bring Mary out, suitors arecoming to us of their own accord," incautiously remarked the littleprincess on hearing the news.Prince Nicholas frowned, but said nothing.A fortnight after the letter Prince Vasili's servants came one eveningin advance of him, and he and his son arrived next day.Old Bolkonski had always had a poor opinion of Prince Vasili'scharacter, but more so recently, since in the new reigns of Paul andAlexander Prince Vasili had risen to high position and honors. And now,from the hints contained in his letter and given by the little princess,he saw which way the wind was blowing, and his low opinion changed intoa feeling of contemptuous ill will. He snorted whenever he mentionedhim. On the day of Prince Vasili's arrival, Prince Bolkonski wasparticularly discontented and out of temper. Whether he was in a badtemper because Prince Vasili was coming, or whether his being in a badtemper made him specially annoyed at Prince Vasili's visit, he was in abad temper, and in the morning Tikhon had already advised the architectnot to go to the prince with his report."Do you hear how he's walking?" said Tikhon, drawing the architect'sattention to the sound of the prince's footsteps. "Stepping flat on hisheels--we know what that means...."However, at nine o'clock the prince, in his velvet coat with a sablecollar and cap, went out for his usual walk. It had snowed the daybefore and the path to the hothouse, along which the prince was in thehabit of walking, had been swept: the marks of the broom were stillvisible in the snow and a shovel had been left sticking in one of thesoft snowbanks that bordered both sides of the path. The prince wentthrough the conservatories, the serfs' quarters, and the outbuildings,frowning and silent."Can a sleigh pass?" he asked his overseer, a venerable man, resemblinghis master in manners and looks, who was accompanying him back to thehouse."The snow is deep. I am having the avenue swept, your honor."The prince bowed his head and went up to the porch. "God be thanked,"thought the overseer, "the storm has blown over!""It would have been hard to drive up, your honor," he added. "I heard,your honor, that a minister is coming to visit your honor."The prince turned round to the overseer and fixed his eyes on him,frowning."What? A minister? What minister? Who gave orders?" he said in hisshrill, harsh voice. "The road is not swept for the princess mydaughter, but for a minister! For me, there are no ministers!""Your honor, I thought...""You thought!" shouted the prince, his words coming more and morerapidly and indistinctly. "You thought!... Rascals! Blackguards!... I'llteach you to think!" and lifting his stick he swung it and would havehit Alpatych, the overseer, had not the latter instinctively avoided theblow. "Thought... Blackguards..." shouted the prince rapidly.But although Alpatych, frightened at his own temerity in avoiding thestroke, came up to the prince, bowing his bald head resignedly beforehim, or perhaps for that very reason, the prince, though he continued toshout: "Blackguards!... Throw the snow back on the road!" did not lifthis stick again but hurried into the house.Before dinner, Princess Mary and Mademoiselle Bourienne, who knew thatthe prince was in a bad humor, stood awaiting him; MademoiselleBourienne with a radiant face that said: "I know nothing, I am the sameas usual," and Princess Mary pale, frightened, and with downcast eyes.What she found hardest to bear was to know that on such occasions sheought to behave like Mademoiselle Bourienne, but could not. She thought:"If I seem not to notice he will think that I do not sympathize withhim; if I seem sad and out of spirits myself, he will say (as he hasdone before) that I'm in the dumps."The prince looked at his daughter's frightened face and snorted."Fool... or dummy!" he muttered."And the other one is not here. They've been telling tales," he thought--referring to the little princess who was not in the dining room."Where is the princess?" he asked. "Hiding?""She is not very well," answered Mademoiselle Bourienne with a brightsmile, "so she won't come down. It is natural in her state.""Hm! Hm!" muttered the prince, sitting down.His plate seemed to him not quite clean, and pointing to a spot he flungit away. Tikhon caught it and handed it to a footman. The littleprincess was not unwell, but had such an overpowering fear of the princethat, hearing he was in a bad humor, she had decided not to appear."I am afraid for the baby," she said to Mademoiselle Bourienne: "Heavenknows what a fright might do."In general at Bald Hills the little princess lived in constant fear, andwith a sense of antipathy to the old prince which she did not realizebecause the fear was so much the stronger feeling. The princereciprocated this antipathy, but it was overpowered by his contempt forher. When the little princess had grown accustomed to life at BaldHills, she took a special fancy to Mademoiselle Bourienne, spent wholedays with her, asked her to sleep in her room, and often talked with herabout the old prince and criticized him."So we are to have visitors, mon prince?" remarked MademoiselleBourienne, unfolding her white napkin with her rosy fingers. "HisExcellency Prince Vasili Kuragin and his son, I understand?" she saidinquiringly."Hm!--his excellency is a puppy.... I got him his appointment in theservice," said the prince disdainfully. "Why his son is coming I don'tunderstand. Perhaps Princess Elizabeth and Princess Mary know. I don'twant him." (He looked at his blushing daughter.) "Are you unwell today?Eh? Afraid of the 'minister' as that idiot Alpatych called him thismorning?""No, mon pere."Though Mademoiselle Bourienne had been so unsuccessful in her choice ofa subject, she did not stop talking, but chattered about theconservatories and the beauty of a flower that had just opened, andafter the soup the prince became more genial.After dinner, he went to see his daughter-in-law. The little princesswas sitting at a small table, chattering with Masha, her maid. She grewpale on seeing her father-in-law.She was much altered. She was now plain rather than pretty. Her cheekshad sunk, her lip was drawn up, and her eyes drawn down."Yes, I feel a kind of oppression," she said in reply to the prince'squestion as to how she felt."Do you want anything?""No, merci, mon pere.""Well, all right, all right."He left the room and went to the waiting room where Alpatych stood withbowed head."Has the snow been shoveled back?""Yes, your excellency. Forgive me for heaven's sake... It was only mystupidity.""All right, all right," interrupted the prince, and laughing hisunnatural way, he stretched out his hand for Alpatych to kiss, and thenproceeded to his study.Prince Vasili arrived that evening. He was met in the avenue by coachmenand footmen, who, with loud shouts, dragged his sleighs up to one of thelodges over the road purposely laden with snow.Prince Vasili and Anatole had separate rooms assigned to them.Anatole, having taken off his overcoat, sat with arms akimbo before atable on a corner of which he smilingly and absent-mindedly fixed hislarge and handsome eyes. He regarded his whole life as a continual roundof amusement which someone for some reason had to provide for him. Andhe looked on this visit to a churlish old man and a rich and uglyheiress in the same way. All this might, he thought, turn out very welland amusingly. "And why not marry her if she really has so much money?That never does any harm," thought Anatole.He shaved and scented himself with the care and elegance which hadbecome habitual to him and, his handsome head held high, entered hisfather's room with the good-humored and victorious air natural to him.Prince Vasili's two valets were busy dressing him, and he looked roundwith much animation and cheerfully nodded to his son as the latterentered, as if to say: "Yes, that's how I want you to look.""I say, Father, joking apart, is she very hideous?" Anatole asked, as ifcontinuing a conversation the subject of which had often been mentionedduring the journey."Enough! What nonsense! Above all, try to be respectful and cautiouswith the old prince.""If he starts a row I'll go away," said Prince Anatole. "I can't bearthose old men! Eh?""Remember, for you everything depends on this."In the meantime, not only was it known in the maidservants' rooms thatthe minister and his son had arrived, but the appearance of both hadbeen minutely described. Princess Mary was sitting alone in her room,vainly trying to master her agitation."Why did they write, why did Lise tell me about it? It can neverhappen!" she said, looking at herself in the glass. "How shall I enterthe drawing room? Even if I like him I can't now be myself with him."The mere thought of her father's look filled her with terror. The littleprincess and Mademoiselle Bourienne had already received from Masha, thelady's maid, the necessary report of how handsome the minister's sonwas, with his rosy cheeks and dark eyebrows, and with what difficultythe father had dragged his legs upstairs while the son had followed himlike an eagle, three steps at a time. Having received this information,the little princess and Mademoiselle Bourienne, whose chattering voiceshad reached her from the corridor, went into Princess Mary's room."You know they've come, Marie?" said the little princess, waddling in,and sinking heavily into an armchair.She was no longer in the loose gown she generally wore in the morning,but had on one of her best dresses. Her hair was carefully done and herface was animated, which, however, did not conceal its sunken and fadedoutlines. Dressed as she used to be in Petersburg society, it was stillmore noticeable how much plainer she had become. Some unobtrusive touchhad been added to Mademoiselle Bourienne's toilet which rendered herfresh and pretty face yet more attractive."What! Are you going to remain as you are, dear princess?" she began."They'll be announcing that the gentlemen are in the drawing room and weshall have to go down, and you have not smartened yourself up at all!"The little princess got up, rang for the maid, and hurriedly and merrilybegan to devise and carry out a plan of how Princess Mary should bedressed. Princess Mary's self-esteem was wounded by the fact that thearrival of a suitor agitated her, and still more so by both hercompanions' not having the least conception that it could be otherwise.To tell them that she felt ashamed for herself and for them would be tobetray her agitation, while to decline their offers to dress her wouldprolong their banter and insistence. She flushed, her beautiful eyesgrew dim, red blotches came on her face, and it took on the unattractivemartyrlike expression it so often wore, as she submitted herself toMademoiselle Bourienne and Lise. Both these women quite sincerely triedto make her look pretty. She was so plain that neither of them couldthink of her as a rival, so they began dressing her with perfectsincerity, and with the naive and firm conviction women have that dresscan make a face pretty."No really, my dear, this dress is not pretty," said Lise, lookingsideways at Princess Mary from a little distance. "You have a maroondress, have it fetched. Really! You know the fate of your whole life maybe at stake. But this one is too light, it's not becoming!"It was not the dress, but the face and whole figure of Princess Marythat was not pretty, but neither Mademoiselle Bourienne nor the littleprincess felt this; they still thought that if a blue ribbon were placedin the hair, the hair combed up, and the blue scarf arranged lower onthe best maroon dress, and so on, all would be well. They forgot thatthe frightened face and the figure could not be altered, and thathowever they might change the setting and adornment of that face, itwould still remain piteous and plain. After two or three changes towhich Princess Mary meekly submitted, just as her hair had been arrangedon the top of her head (a style that quite altered and spoiled herlooks) and she had put on a maroon dress with a pale-blue scarf, thelittle princess walked twice round her, now adjusting a fold of thedress with her little hand, now arranging the scarf and looking at herwith her head bent first on one side and then on the other."No, it will not do," she said decidedly, clasping her hands. "No, Mary,really this dress does not suit you. I prefer you in your little grayeveryday dress. Now please, do it for my sake. Katie," she said to themaid, "bring the princess her gray dress, and you'll see, MademoiselleBourienne, how I shall arrange it," she added, smiling with a foretasteof artistic pleasure.But when Katie brought the required dress, Princess Mary remainedsitting motionless before the glass, looking at her face, and saw in themirror her eyes full of tears and her mouth quivering, ready to burstinto sobs."Come, dear princess," said Mademoiselle Bourienne, "just one morelittle effort."The little princess, taking the dress from the maid, came up to PrincessMary."Well, now we'll arrange something quite simple and becoming," she said.The three voices, hers, Mademoiselle Bourienne's, and Katie's, who waslaughing at something, mingled in a merry sound, like the chirping ofbirds."No, leave me alone," said Princess Mary.Her voice sounded so serious and so sad that the chirping of the birdswas silenced at once. They looked at the beautiful, large, thoughtfuleyes full of tears and of thoughts, gazing shiningly and imploringly atthem, and understood that it was useless and even cruel to insist."At least, change your coiffure," said the little princess. "Didn't Itell you," she went on, turning reproachfully to Mademoiselle Bourienne,"Mary's is a face which such a coiffure does not suit in the least. Notin the least! Please change it.""Leave me alone, please leave me alone! It is all quite the same to me,"answered a voice struggling with tears.Mademoiselle Bourienne and the little princess had to own to themselvesthat Princess Mary in this guise looked very plain, worse than usual,but it was too late. She was looking at them with an expression theyboth knew, an expression thoughtful and sad. This expression in PrincessMary did not frighten them (she never inspired fear in anyone), but theyknew that when it appeared on her face, she became mute and was not tobe shaken in her determination."You will change it, won't you?" said Lise. And as Princess Mary gave noanswer, she left the room.Princess Mary was left alone. She did not comply with Lise's request,she not only left her hair as it was, but did not even look in herglass. Letting her arms fall helplessly, she sat with downcast eyes andpondered. A husband, a man, a strong dominant and strangely attractivebeing rose in her imagination, and carried her into a totally differenthappy world of his own. She fancied a child, her own--such as she hadseen the day before in the arms of her nurse's daughter--at her ownbreast, the husband standing by and gazing tenderly at her and thechild. "But no, it is impossible, I am too ugly," she thought."Please come to tea. The prince will be out in a moment," came themaid's voice at the door.She roused herself, and felt appalled at what she had been thinking, andbefore going down she went into the room where the icons hung and, hereyes fixed on the dark face of a large icon of the Saviour lit by alamp, she stood before it with folded hands for a few moments. A painfuldoubt filled her soul. Could the joy of love, of earthly love for a man,be for her? In her thoughts of marriage Princess Mary dreamed ofhappiness and of children, but her strongest, most deeply hidden longingwas for earthly love. The more she tried to hide this feeling fromothers and even from herself, the stronger it grew. "O God," she said,"how am I to stifle in my heart these temptations of the devil? How am Ito renounce forever these vile fancies, so as peacefully to fulfill Thywill?" And scarcely had she put that question than God gave her theanswer in her own heart. "Desire nothing for thyself, seek nothing, benot anxious or envious. Man's future and thy own fate must remain hiddenfrom thee, but live so that thou mayest be ready for anything. If it beGod's will to prove thee in the duties of marriage, be ready to fulfillHis will." With this consoling thought (but yet with a hope for thefulfillment of her forbidden earthly longing) Princess Mary sighed, andhaving crossed herself went down, thinking neither of her gown andcoiffure nor of how she would go in nor of what she would say. Whatcould all that matter in comparison with the will of God, without Whosecare not a hair of man's head can fall?CHAPTER IVWhen Princess Mary came down, Prince Vasili and his son were already inthe drawing room, talking to the little princess and MademoiselleBourienne. When she entered with her heavy step, treading on her heels,the gentlemen and Mademoiselle Bourienne rose and the little princess,indicating her to the gentlemen, said: "Voila Marie!" Princess Mary sawthem all and saw them in detail. She saw Prince Vasili's face, seriousfor an instant at the sight of her, but immediately smiling again, andthe little princess curiously noting the impression "Marie" produced onthe visitors. And she saw Mademoiselle Bourienne, with her ribbon andpretty face, and her unusually animated look which was fixed on him, buthim she could not see, she only saw something large, brilliant, andhandsome moving toward her as she entered the room. Prince Vasiliapproached first, and she kissed the bold forehead that bent over herhand and answered his question by saying that, on the contrary, sheremembered him quite well. Then Anatole came up to her. She still couldnot see him. She only felt a soft hand taking hers firmly, and shetouched with her lips a white forehead, over which was beautiful light-brown hair smelling of pomade. When she looked up at him she was struckby his beauty. Anatole stood with his right thumb under a button of hisuniform, his chest expanded and his back drawn in, slightly swinging onefoot, and, with his head a little bent, looked with beaming face at theprincess without speaking and evidently not thinking about her at all.Anatole was not quick-witted, nor ready or eloquent in conversation, buthe had the faculty, so invaluable in society, of composure andimperturbable self-possession. If a man lacking in self-confidenceremains dumb on a first introduction and betrays a consciousness of theimpropriety of such silence and an anxiety to find something to say, theeffect is bad. But Anatole was dumb, swung his foot, and smilinglyexamined the princess' hair. It was evident that he could be silent inthis way for a very long time. "If anyone finds this silenceinconvenient, let him talk, but I don't want to," he seemed to say.Besides this, in his behavior to women Anatole had a manner whichparticularly inspires in them curiosity, awe, and even love--asupercilious consciousness of his own superiority. It was as if he saidto them: "I know you, I know you, but why should I bother about you?You'd be only too glad, of course." Perhaps he did not really think thiswhen he met women--even probably he did not, for in general he thoughtvery little--but his looks and manner gave that impression. The princessfelt this, and as if wishing to show him that she did not even dareexpect to interest him, she turned to his father. The conversation wasgeneral and animated, thanks to Princess Lise's voice and little downylip that lifted over her white teeth. She met Prince Vasili with thatplayful manner often employed by lively chatty people, and consisting inthe assumption that between the person they so address and themselvesthere are some semi-private, long-established jokes and amusingreminiscences, though no such reminiscences really exist--just as noneexisted in this case. Prince Vasili readily adopted her tone and thelittle princess also drew Anatole, whom she hardly knew, into theseamusing recollections of things that had never occurred. MademoiselleBourienne also shared them and even Princess Mary felt herselfpleasantly made to share in these merry reminiscences."Here at least we shall have the benefit of your company all toourselves, dear prince," said the little princess (of course, in French)to Prince Vasili. "It's not as at Annette's * receptions where youalways ran away; you remember cette chere Annette!"* Anna Pavlovna."Ah, but you won't talk politics to me like Annette!""And our little tea table?""Oh, yes!""Why is it you were never at Annette's?" the little princess askedAnatole. "Ah, I know, I know," she said with a sly glance, "your brotherHippolyte told me about your goings on. Oh!" and she shook her finger athim, "I have even heard of your doings in Paris!""And didn't Hippolyte tell you?" asked Prince Vasili, turning to his sonand seizing the little princess' arm as if she would have run away andhe had just managed to catch her, "didn't he tell you how he himself waspining for the dear princess, and how she showed him the door? Oh, sheis a pearl among women, Princess," he added, turning to Princess Mary.When Paris was mentioned, Mademoiselle Bourienne for her part seized theopportunity of joining in the general current of recollections.She took the liberty of inquiring whether it was long since Anatole hadleft Paris and how he had liked that city. Anatole answered theFrenchwoman very readily and, looking at her with a smile, talked to herabout her native land. When he saw the pretty little Bourienne, Anatolecame to the conclusion that he would not find Bald Hills dull either."Not at all bad!" he thought, examining her, "not at all bad, thatlittle companion! I hope she will bring her along with her when we'remarried, la petite est gentille." ** The little one is charming.The old prince dressed leisurely in his study, frowning and consideringwhat he was to do. The coming of these visitors annoyed him. "What arePrince Vasili and that son of his to me? Prince Vasili is a shallowbraggart and his son, no doubt, is a fine specimen," he grumbled tohimself. What angered him was that the coming of these visitors revivedin his mind an unsettled question he always tried to stifle, one aboutwhich he always deceived himself. The question was whether he could everbring himself to part from his daughter and give her to a husband. Theprince never directly asked himself that question, knowing beforehandthat he would have to answer it justly, and justice clashed not onlywith his feelings but with the very possibility of life. Life withoutPrincess Mary, little as he seemed to value her, was unthinkable to him."And why should she marry?" he thought. "To be unhappy for certain.There's Lise, married to Andrew--a better husband one would think couldhardly be found nowadays--but is she contented with her lot? And whowould marry Marie for love? Plain and awkward! They'll take her for herconnections and wealth. Are there no women living unmarried, and eventhe happier for it?" So thought Prince Bolkonski while dressing, and yetthe question he was always putting off demanded an immediate answer.Prince Vasili had brought his son with the evident intention ofproposing, and today or tomorrow he would probably ask for an answer.His birth and position in society were not bad. "Well, I've nothingagainst it," the prince said to himself, "but he must be worthy of her.And that is what we shall see.""That is what we shall see! That is what we shall see!" he added aloud.He entered the drawing room with his usual alert step, glancing rapidlyround the company. He noticed the change in the little princess' dress,Mademoiselle Bourienne's ribbon, Princess Mary's unbecoming coiffure,Mademoiselle Bourienne's and Anatole's smiles, and the loneliness of hisdaughter amid the general conversation. "Got herself up like a fool!" hethought, looking irritably at her. "She is shameless, and he ignoresher!"He went straight up to Prince Vasili."Well! How d'ye do? How d'ye do? Glad to see you!""Friendship laughs at distance," began Prince Vasili in his usual rapid,self-confident, familiar tone. "Here is my second son; please love andbefriend him."Prince Bolkonski surveyed Anatole."Fine young fellow! Fine young fellow!" he said. "Well, come and kissme," and he offered his cheek.Anatole kissed the old man, and looked at him with curiosity and perfectcomposure, waiting for a display of the eccentricities his father hadtold him to expect.Prince Bolkonski sat down in his usual place in the corner of the sofaand, drawing up an armchair for Prince Vasili, pointed to it and beganquestioning him about political affairs and news. He seemed to listenattentively to what Prince Vasili said, but kept glancing at PrincessMary."And so they are writing from Potsdam already?" he said, repeatingPrince Vasili's last words. Then rising, he suddenly went up to hisdaughter."Is it for visitors you've got yourself up like that, eh?" said he."Fine, very fine! You have done up your hair in this new way for thevisitors, and before the visitors I tell you that in future you arenever to dare to change your way of dress without my consent.""It was my fault, mon pere," interceded the little princess, with ablush."You must do as you please," said Prince Bolkonski, bowing to hisdaughter-in-law, "but she need not make a fool of herself, she's plainenough as it is."And he sat down again, paying no more attention to his daughter, who wasreduced to tears."On the contrary, that coiffure suits the princess very well," saidPrince Vasili."Now you, young prince, what's your name?" said Prince Bolkonski,turning to Anatole, "come here, let us talk and get acquainted.""Now the fun begins," thought Anatole, sitting down with a smile besidethe old prince."Well, my dear boy, I hear you've been educated abroad, not taught toread and write by the deacon, like your father and me. Now tell me, mydear boy, are you serving in the Horse Guards?" asked the old man,scrutinizing Anatole closely and intently."No, I have been transferred to the line," said Anatole, hardly able torestrain his laughter."Ah! That's a good thing. So, my dear boy, you wish to serve the Tsarand the country? It is wartime. Such a fine fellow must serve. Well, areyou off to the front?""No, Prince, our regiment has gone to the front, but I am attached...what is it I am attached to, Papa?" said Anatole, turning to his fatherwith a laugh."A splendid soldier, splendid! 'What am I attached to!' Ha, ha, ha!"laughed Prince Bolkonski, and Anatole laughed still louder. SuddenlyPrince Bolkonski frowned."You may go," he said to Anatole.Anatole returned smiling to the ladies."And so you've had him educated abroad, Prince Vasili, haven't you?"said the old prince to Prince Vasili."I have done my best for him, and I can assure you the education thereis much better than ours.""Yes, everything is different nowadays, everything is changed. The lad'sa fine fellow, a fine fellow! Well, come with me now." He took PrinceVasili's arm and led him to his study. As soon as they were alonetogether, Prince Vasili announced his hopes and wishes to the oldprince."Well, do you think I shall prevent her, that I can't part from her?"said the old prince angrily. "What an idea! I'm ready for it tomorrow!Only let me tell you, I want to know my son-in-law better. You know myprinciples--everything aboveboard? I will ask her tomorrow in yourpresence; if she is willing, then he can stay on. He can stay and I'llsee." The old prince snorted. "Let her marry, it's all the same to me!"he screamed in the same piercing tone as when parting from his son."I will tell you frankly," said Prince Vasili in the tone of a craftyman convinced of the futility of being cunning with so keen-sighted acompanion. "You know, you see right through people. Anatole is nogenius, but he is an honest, goodhearted lad; an excellent son orkinsman.""All right, all right, we'll see!"As always happens when women lead lonely lives for any length of timewithout male society, on Anatole's appearance all the three women ofPrince Bolkonski's household felt that their life had not been real tillthen. Their powers of reasoning, feeling, and observing immediatelyincreased tenfold, and their life, which seemed to have been passed indarkness, was suddenly lit up by a new brightness, full of significance.Princess Mary grew quite unconscious of her face and coiffure. Thehandsome open face of the man who might perhaps be her husband absorbedall her attention. He seemed to her kind, brave, determined, manly, andmagnanimous. She felt convinced of that. Thousands of dreams of a futurefamily life continually rose in her imagination. She drove them away andtried to conceal them."But am I not too cold with him?" thought the princess. "I try to bereserved because in the depth of my soul I feel too near to him already,but then he cannot know what I think of him and may imagine that I donot like him."And Princess Mary tried, but could not manage, to be cordial to her newguest. "Poor girl, she's devilish ugly!" thought Anatole.Mademoiselle Bourienne, also roused to great excitement by Anatole'sarrival, thought in another way. Of course, she, a handsome young womanwithout any definite position, without relations or even a country, didnot intend to devote her life to serving Prince Bolkonski, to readingaloud to him and being friends with Princess Mary. MademoiselleBourienne had long been waiting for a Russian prince who, able toappreciate at a glance her superiority to the plain, badly dressed,ungainly Russian princesses, would fall in love with her and carry heroff; and here at last was a Russian prince. Mademoiselle Bourienne knewa story, heard from her aunt but finished in her own way, which sheliked to repeat to herself. It was the story of a girl who had beenseduced, and to whom her poor mother (sa pauvre mere) appeared, andreproached her for yielding to a man without being married. MademoiselleBourienne was often touched to tears as in imagination she told thisstory to him, her seducer. And now he, a real Russian prince, hadappeared. He would carry her away and then sa pauvre mere would appearand he would marry her. So her future shaped itself in MademoiselleBourienne's head at the very time she was talking to Anatole aboutParis. It was not calculation that guided her (she did not even for amoment consider what she should do), but all this had long been familiarto her, and now that Anatole had appeared it just grouped itself aroundhim and she wished and tried to please him as much as possible.The little princess, like an old war horse that hears the trumpet,unconsciously and quite forgetting her condition, prepared for thefamiliar gallop of coquetry, without any ulterior motive or anystruggle, but with naive and lighthearted gaiety.Although in female society Anatole usually assumed the role of a mantired of being run after by women, his vanity was flattered by thespectacle of his power over these three women. Besides that, he wasbeginning to feel for the pretty and provocative Mademoiselle Bouriennethat passionate animal feeling which was apt to master him with greatsuddenness and prompt him to the coarsest and most reckless actions.After tea, the company went into the sitting room and Princess Mary wasasked to play on the clavichord. Anatole, laughing and in high spirits,came and leaned on his elbows, facing her and beside MademoiselleBourienne. Princess Mary felt his look with a painfully joyous emotion.Her favorite sonata bore her into a most intimately poetic world and thelook she felt upon her made that world still more poetic. But Anatole'sexpression, though his eyes were fixed on her, referred not to her butto the movements of Mademoiselle Bourienne's little foot, which he wasthen touching with his own under the clavichord. Mademoiselle Bouriennewas also looking at Princess Mary, and in her lovely eyes there was alook of fearful joy and hope that was also new to the princess."How she loves me!" thought Princess Mary. "How happy I am now, and howhappy I may be with such a friend and such a husband! Husband? Can it bepossible?" she thought, not daring to look at his face, but stillfeeling his eyes gazing at her.In the evening, after supper, when all were about to retire, Anatolekissed Princess Mary's hand. She did not know how she found the courage,but she looked straight into his handsome face as it came near to hershortsighted eyes. Turning from Princess Mary he went up and kissedMademoiselle Bourienne's hand. (This was not etiquette, but then he dideverything so simply and with such assurance!) Mademoiselle Bourienneflushed, and gave the princess a frightened look."What delicacy!" thought the princess. "Is it possible that Amelie"(Mademoiselle Bourienne) "thinks I could be jealous of her, and notvalue her pure affection and devotion to me?" She went up to her andkissed her warmly. Anatole went up to kiss the little princess' hand."No! No! No! When your father writes to tell me that you are behavingwell I will give you my hand to kiss. Not till then!" she said. Andsmilingly raising a finger at him, she left the room.CHAPTER VThey all separated, but, except Anatole who fell asleep as soon as hegot into bed, all kept awake a long time that night."Is he really to be my husband, this stranger who is so kind--yes, kind,that is the chief thing," thought Princess Mary; and fear, which she hadseldom experienced, came upon her. She feared to look round, it seemedto her that someone was there standing behind the screen in the darkcorner. And this someone was he--the devil--and he was also this manwith the white forehead, black eyebrows, and red lips.She rang for her maid and asked her to sleep in her room.Mademoiselle Bourienne walked up and down the conservatory for a longtime that evening, vainly expecting someone, now smiling at someone, nowworking herself up to tears with the imaginary words of her pauvre mererebuking her for her fall.The little princess grumbled to her maid that her bed was badly made.She could not lie either on her face or on her side. Every position wasawkward and uncomfortable, and her burden oppressed her now more thanever because Anatole's presence had vividly recalled to her the timewhen she was not like that and when everything was light and gay. Shesat in an armchair in her dressing jacket and nightcap and Katie, sleepyand disheveled, beat and turned the heavy feather bed for the thirdtime, muttering to herself."I told you it was all lumps and holes!" the little princess repeated."I should be glad enough to fall asleep, so it's not my fault!" and hervoice quivered like that of a child about to cry.The old prince did not sleep either. Tikhon, half asleep, heard himpacing angrily about and snorting. The old prince felt as though he hadbeen insulted through his daughter. The insult was the more pointedbecause it concerned not himself but another, his daughter, whom heloved more than himself. He kept telling himself that he would considerthe whole matter and decide what was right and how he should act, butinstead of that he only excited himself more and more."The first man that turns up--she forgets her father and everythingelse, runs upstairs and does up her hair and wags her tail and is unlikeherself! Glad to throw her father over! And she knew I should notice it.Fr... fr... fr! And don't I see that that idiot had eyes only forBourienne--I shall have to get rid of her. And how is it she has notpride enough to see it? If she has no pride for herself she might atleast have some for my sake! She must be shown that the blockhead thinksnothing of her and looks only at Bourienne. No, she has no pride... butI'll let her see...."The old prince knew that if he told his daughter she was making amistake and that Anatole meant to flirt with Mademoiselle Bourienne,Princess Mary's self-esteem would be wounded and his point (not to beparted from her) would be gained, so pacifying himself with thisthought, he called Tikhon and began to undress."What devil brought them here?" thought he, while Tikhon was putting thenightshirt over his dried-up old body and gray-haired chest. "I neverinvited them. They came to disturb my life--and there is not much of itleft.""Devil take 'em!" he muttered, while his head was still covered by theshirt.Tikhon knew his master's habit of sometimes thinking aloud, andtherefore met with unaltered looks the angrily inquisitive expression ofthe face that emerged from the shirt."Gone to bed?" asked the prince.Tikhon, like all good valets, instinctively knew the direction of hismaster's thoughts. He guessed that the question referred to PrinceVasili and his son."They have gone to bed and put out their lights, your excellency.""No good... no good..." said the prince rapidly, and thrusting his feetinto his slippers and his arms into the sleeves of his dressing gown, hewent to the couch on which he slept.Though no words had passed between Anatole and Mademoiselle Bourienne,they quite understood one another as to the first part of their romance,up to the appearance of the pauvre mere; they understood that they hadmuch to say to one another in private and so they had been seeking anopportunity since morning to meet one another alone. When Princess Marywent to her father's room at the usual hour, Mademoiselle Bourienne andAnatole met in the conservatory.Princess Mary went to the door of the study with special trepidation. Itseemed to her that not only did everybody know that her fate would bedecided that day, but that they also knew what she thought about it. Sheread this in Tikhon's face and in that of Prince Vasili's valet, whomade her a low bow when she met him in the corridor carrying hot water.The old prince was very affectionate and careful in his treatment of hisdaughter that morning. Princess Mary well knew this painstakingexpression of her father's. His face wore that expression when his dryhands clenched with vexation at her not understanding a sum inarithmetic, when rising from his chair he would walk away from her,repeating in a low voice the same words several times over.He came to the point at once, treating her ceremoniously."I have had a proposition made me concerning you," he said with anunnatural smile. "I expect you have guessed that Prince Vasili has notcome and brought his pupil with him" (for some reason Prince Bolkonskireferred to Anatole as a "pupil") "for the sake of my beautiful eyes.Last night a proposition was made me on your account and, as you know myprinciples, I refer it to you.""How am I to understand you, mon pere?" said the princess, growing paleand then blushing."How understand me!" cried her father angrily. "Prince Vasili finds youto his taste as a daughter-in-law and makes a proposal to you on hispupil's behalf. That's how it's to be understood! 'How understandit'!... And I ask you!""I do not know what you think, Father," whispered the princess."I? I? What of me? Leave me out of the question. I'm not going to getmarried. What about you? That's what I want to know."The princess saw that her father regarded the matter with disapproval,but at that moment the thought occurred to her that her fate would bedecided now or never. She lowered her eyes so as not to see the gazeunder which she felt that she could not think, but would only be able tosubmit from habit, and she said: "I wish only to do your will, but if Ihad to express my own desire..." She had no time to finish. The oldprince interrupted her."That's admirable!" he shouted. "He will take you with your dowry andtake Mademoiselle Bourienne into the bargain. She'll be the wife, whileyou..."The prince stopped. He saw the effect these words had produced on hisdaughter. She lowered her head and was ready to burst into tears."Now then, now then, I'm only joking!" he said. "Remember this,Princess, I hold to the principle that a maiden has a full right tochoose. I give you freedom. Only remember that your life's happinessdepends on your decision. Never mind me!""But I do not know, Father!""There's no need to talk! He receives his orders and will marry you oranybody; but you are free to choose.... Go to your room, think it over,and come back in an hour and tell me in his presence: yes or no. I knowyou will pray over it. Well, pray if you like, but you had better thinkit over. Go! Yes or no, yes or no, yes or no!" he still shouted when theprincess, as if lost in a fog, had already staggered out of the study.Her fate was decided and happily decided. But what her father had saidabout Mademoiselle Bourienne was dreadful. It was untrue to be sure, butstill it was terrible, and she could not help thinking of it. She wasgoing straight on through the conservatory, neither seeing nor hearinganything, when suddenly the well-known whispering of MademoiselleBourienne aroused her. She raised her eyes, and two steps away sawAnatole embracing the Frenchwoman and whispering something to her. Witha horrified expression on his handsome face, Anatole looked at PrincessMary, but did not at once take his arm from the waist of MademoiselleBourienne who had not yet seen her."Who's that? Why? Wait a moment!" Anatole's face seemed to say. PrincessMary looked at them in silence. She could not understand it. At lastMademoiselle Bourienne gave a scream and ran away. Anatole bowed toPrincess Mary with a gay smile, as if inviting her to join in a laugh atthis strange incident, and then shrugging his shoulders went to the doorthat led to his own apartments.An hour later, Tikhon came to call Princess Mary to the old prince; headded that Prince Vasili was also there. When Tikhon came to herPrincess Mary was sitting on the sofa in her room, holding the weepingMademoiselle Bourienne in her arms and gently stroking her hair. Theprincess' beautiful eyes with all their former calm radiance werelooking with tender affection and pity at Mademoiselle Bourienne'spretty face."No, Princess, I have lost your affection forever!" said MademoiselleBourienne."Why? I love you more than ever," said Princess Mary, "and I will try todo all I can for your happiness.""But you despise me. You who are so pure can never understand being socarried away by passion. Oh, only my poor mother...""I quite understand," answered Princess Mary, with a sad smile. "Calmyourself, my dear. I will go to my father," she said, and went out.Prince Vasili, with one leg thrown high over the other and a snuffbox inhis hand, was sitting there with a smile of deep emotion on his face, asif stirred to his heart's core and himself regretting and laughing athis own sensibility, when Princess Mary entered. He hurriedly took apinch of snuff."Ah, my dear, my dear!" he began, rising and taking her by both hands.Then, sighing, he added: "My son's fate is in your hands. Decide, mydear, good, gentle Marie, whom I have always loved as a daughter!"He drew back and a real tear appeared in his eye."Fr... fr..." snorted Prince Bolkonski. "The prince is making aproposition to you in his pupil's--I mean, his son's--name. Do you wishor not to be Prince Anatole Kuragin's wife? Reply: yes or no," heshouted, "and then I shall reserve the right to state my opinion also.Yes, my opinion, and only my opinion," added Prince Bolkonski, turningto Prince Vasili and answering his imploring look. "Yes, or no?""My desire is never to leave you, Father, never to separate my life fromyours. I don't wish to marry," she answered positively, glancing atPrince Vasili and at her father with her beautiful eyes."Humbug! Nonsense! Humbug, humbug, humbug!" cried Prince Bolkonski,frowning and taking his daughter's hand; he did not kiss her, but onlybending his forehead to hers just touched it, and pressed her hand sothat she winced and uttered a cry.Prince Vasili rose."My dear, I must tell you that this is a moment I shall never, neverforget. But, my dear, will you not give us a little hope of touchingthis heart, so kind and generous? Say 'perhaps'... The future is solong. Say 'perhaps.'""Prince, what I have said is all there is in my heart. I thank you forthe honor, but I shall never be your son's wife.""Well, so that's finished, my dear fellow! I am very glad to have seenyou. Very glad! Go back to your rooms, Princess. Go!" said the oldprince. "Very, very glad to have seen you," repeated he, embracingPrince Vasili."My vocation is a different one," thought Princess Mary. "My vocation isto be happy with another kind of happiness, the happiness of love andself-sacrifice. And cost what it may, I will arrange poor Amelie'shappiness, she loves him so passionately, and so passionately repents. Iwill do all I can to arrange the match between them. If he is not rich Iwill give her the means; I will ask my father and Andrew. I shall be sohappy when she is his wife. She is so unfortunate, a stranger, alone,helpless! And, oh God, how passionately she must love him if she couldso far forget herself! Perhaps I might have done the same!..." thoughtPrincess Mary.CHAPTER VIIt was long since the Rostovs had news of Nicholas. Not till midwinterwas the count at last handed a letter addressed in his son'shandwriting. On receiving it, he ran on tiptoe to his study in alarm andhaste, trying to escape notice, closed the door, and began to read theletter.Anna Mikhaylovna, who always knew everything that passed in the house,on hearing of the arrival of the letter went softly into the room andfound the count with it in his hand, sobbing and laughing at the sametime.Anna Mikhaylovna, though her circumstances had improved, was stillliving with the Rostovs."My dear friend?" said she, in a tone of pathetic inquiry, prepared tosympathize in any way.The count sobbed yet more."Nikolenka... a letter... wa... a... s... wounded... my darling boy...the countess... promoted to be an officer... thank God... How tell thelittle countess!"Anna Mikhaylovna sat down beside him, with her own handkerchief wipedthe tears from his eyes and from the letter, then having dried her owneyes she comforted the count, and decided that at dinner and tillteatime she would prepare the countess, and after tea, with God's help,would inform her.At dinner Anna Mikhaylovna talked the whole time about the war news andabout Nikolenka, twice asked when the last letter had been received fromhim, though she knew that already, and remarked that they might verylikely be getting a letter from him that day. Each time that these hintsbegan to make the countess anxious and she glanced uneasily at the countand at Anna Mikhaylovna, the latter very adroitly turned theconversation to insignificant matters. Natasha, who, of the wholefamily, was the most gifted with a capacity to feel any shades ofintonation, look, and expression, pricked up her ears from the beginningof the meal and was certain that there was some secret between herfather and Anna Mikhaylovna, that it had something to do with herbrother, and that Anna Mikhaylovna was preparing them for it. Bold asshe was, Natasha, who knew how sensitive her mother was to anythingrelating to Nikolenka, did not venture to ask any questions at dinner,but she was too excited to eat anything and kept wriggling about on herchair regardless of her governess' remarks. After dinner, she rushedhead long after Anna Mikhaylovna and, dashing at her, flung herself onher neck as soon as she overtook her in the sitting room."Auntie, darling, do tell me what it is!""Nothing, my dear.""No, dearest, sweet one, honey, I won't give up--I know you knowsomething."Anna Mikhaylovna shook her head."You are a little slyboots," she said."A letter from Nikolenka! I'm sure of it!" exclaimed Natasha, readingconfirmation in Anna Mikhaylovna's face."But for God's sake, be careful, you know how it may affect your mamma.""I will, I will, only tell me! You won't? Then I will go and tell atonce."Anna Mikhaylovna, in a few words, told her the contents of the letter,on condition that she should tell no one."No, on my true word of honor," said Natasha, crossing herself, "I won'ttell anyone!" and she ran off at once to Sonya."Nikolenka... wounded... a letter," she announced in gleeful triumph."Nicholas!" was all Sonya said, instantly turning white.Natasha, seeing the impression the news of her brother's wound producedon Sonya, felt for the first time the sorrowful side of the news.She rushed to Sonya, hugged her, and began to cry."A little wound, but he has been made an officer; he is well now, hewrote himself," said she through her tears."There now! It's true that all you women are crybabies," remarked Petya,pacing the room with large, resolute strides. "Now I'm very glad, veryglad indeed, that my brother has distinguished himself so. You are allblubberers and understand nothing."Natasha smiled through her tears."You haven't read the letter?" asked Sonya."No, but she said that it was all over and that he's now an officer.""Thank God!" said Sonya, crossing herself. "But perhaps she deceivedyou. Let us go to Mamma."Petya paced the room in silence for a time."If I'd been in Nikolenka's place I would have killed even more of thoseFrenchmen," he said. "What nasty brutes they are! I'd have killed somany that there'd have been a heap of them.""Hold your tongue, Petya, what a goose you are!""I'm not a goose, but they are who cry about trifles," said Petya."Do you remember him?" Natasha suddenly asked, after a moment's silence.Sonya smiled."Do I remember Nicholas?""No, Sonya, but do you remember so that you remember him perfectly,remember everything?" said Natasha, with an expressive gesture,evidently wishing to give her words a very definite meaning. "I rememberNikolenka too, I remember him well," she said. "But I don't rememberBoris. I don't remember him a bit.""What! You don't remember Boris?" asked Sonya in surprise."It's not that I don't remember--I know what he is like, but not as Iremember Nikolenka. Him--I just shut my eyes and remember, but Boris...No!" (She shut her eyes.) "No! there's nothing at all.""Oh, Natasha!" said Sonya, looking ecstatically and earnestly at herfriend as if she did not consider her worthy to hear what she meant tosay and as if she were saying it to someone else, with whom joking wasout of the question, "I am in love with your brother once for all and,whatever may happen to him or to me, shall never cease to love him aslong as I live."Natasha looked at Sonya with wondering and inquisitive eyes, and saidnothing. She felt that Sonya was speaking the truth, that there was suchlove as Sonya was speaking of. But Natasha had not yet felt anythinglike it. She believed it could be, but did not understand it."Shall you write to him?" she asked.Sonya became thoughtful. The question of how to write to Nicholas, andwhether she ought to write, tormented her. Now that he was already anofficer and a wounded hero, would it be right to remind him of herselfand, as it might seem, of the obligations to her he had taken onhimself?"I don't know. I think if he writes, I will write too," she said,blushing."And you won't feel ashamed to write to him?"Sonya smiled."No.""And I should be ashamed to write to Boris. I'm not going to.""Why should you be ashamed?""Well, I don't know. It's awkward and would make me ashamed.""And I know why she'd be ashamed," said Petya, offended by Natasha'sprevious remark. "It's because she was in love with that fat one inspectacles" (that was how Petya described his namesake, the new CountBezukhov) "and now she's in love with that singer" (he meant Natasha'sItalian singing master), "that's why she's ashamed!""Petya, you're a stupid!" said Natasha."Not more stupid than you, madam," said the nine-year-old Petya, withthe air of an old brigadier.The countess had been prepared by Anna Mikhaylovna's hints at dinner. Onretiring to her own room, she sat in an armchair, her eyes fixed on aminiature portrait of her son on the lid of a snuffbox, while the tearskept coming into her eyes. Anna Mikhaylovna, with the letter, came ontiptoe to the countess' door and paused."Don't come in," she said to the old count who was following her. "Comelater." And she went in, closing the door behind her.The count put his ear to the keyhole and listened.At first he heard the sound of indifferent voices, then AnnaMikhaylovna's voice alone in a long speech, then a cry, then silence,then both voices together with glad intonations, and then footsteps.Anna Mikhaylovna opened the door. Her face wore the proud expression ofa surgeon who has just performed a difficult operation and admits thepublic to appreciate his skill."It is done!" she said to the count, pointing triumphantly to thecountess, who sat holding in one hand the snuffbox with its portrait andin the other the letter, and pressing them alternately to her lips.When she saw the count, she stretched out her arms to him, embraced hisbald head, over which she again looked at the letter and the portrait,and in order to press them again to her lips, she slightly pushed awaythe bald head. Vera, Natasha, Sonya, and Petya now entered the room, andthe reading of the letter began. After a brief description of thecampaign and the two battles in which he had taken part, and hispromotion, Nicholas said that he kissed his father's and mother's handsasking for their blessing, and that he kissed Vera, Natasha, and Petya.Besides that, he sent greetings to Monsieur Schelling, Madame Schoss,and his old nurse, and asked them to kiss for him "dear Sonya, whom heloved and thought of just the same as ever." When she heard this Sonyablushed so that tears came into her eyes and, unable to bear the looksturned upon her, ran away into the dancing hall, whirled round it atfull speed with her dress puffed out like a balloon, and, flushed andsmiling, plumped down on the floor. The countess was crying."Why are you crying, Mamma?" asked Vera. "From all he says one should beglad and not cry."This was quite true, but the count, the countess, and Natasha looked ather reproachfully. "And who is it she takes after?" thought thecountess.Nicholas' letter was read over hundreds of times, and those who wereconsidered worthy to hear it had to come to the countess, for she didnot let it out of her hands. The tutors came, and the nurses, andDmitri, and several acquaintances, and the countess reread the lettereach time with fresh pleasure and each time discovered in it freshproofs of Nikolenka's virtues. How strange, how extraordinary, howjoyful it seemed, that her son, the scarcely perceptible motion of whosetiny limbs she had felt twenty years ago within her, that son about whomshe used to have quarrels with the too indulgent count, that son who hadfirst learned to say "pear" and then "granny," that this son should nowbe away in a foreign land amid strange surroundings, a manly warriordoing some kind of man's work of his own, without help or guidance. Theuniversal experience of ages, showing that children do growimperceptibly from the cradle to manhood, did not exist for thecountess. Her son's growth toward manhood, at each of its stages, hadseemed as extraordinary to her as if there had never existed themillions of human beings who grew up in the same way. As twenty yearsbefore, it seemed impossible that the little creature who livedsomewhere under her heart would ever cry, suck her breast, and begin tospeak, so now she could not believe that that little creature could bethis strong, brave man, this model son and officer that, judging by thisletter, he now was."What a style! How charmingly he describes!" said she, reading thedescriptive part of the letter. "And what a soul! Not a word abouthimself.... Not a word! About some Denisov or other, though he himself,I dare say, is braver than any of them. He says nothing about hissufferings. What a heart! How like him it is! And how he has rememberedeverybody! Not forgetting anyone. I always said when he was only sohigh--I always said...."For more than a week preparations were being made, rough drafts ofletters to Nicholas from all the household were written and copied out,while under the supervision of the countess and the solicitude of thecount, money and all things necessary for the uniform and equipment ofthe newly commissioned officer were collected. Anna Mikhaylovna,practical woman that she was, had even managed by favor with armyauthorities to secure advantageous means of communication for herselfand her son. She had opportunities of sending her letters to the GrandDuke Constantine Pavlovich, who commanded the Guards. The Rostovssupposed that The Russian Guards, Abroad, was quite a definite address,and that if a letter reached the Grand Duke in command of the Guardsthere was no reason why it should not reach the Pavlograd regiment,which was presumably somewhere in the same neighborhood. And so it wasdecided to send the letters and money by the Grand Duke's courier toBoris and Boris was to forward them to Nicholas. The letters were fromthe old count, the countess, Petya, Vera, Natasha, and Sonya, andfinally there were six thousand rubles for his outfit and various otherthings the old count sent to his son.CHAPTER VIIOn the twelfth of November, Kutuzov's active army, in camp beforeOlmutz, was preparing to be reviewed next day by the two Emperors--theRussian and the Austrian. The Guards, just arrived from Russia, spentthe night ten miles from Olmutz and next morning were to come straightto the review, reaching the field at Olmutz by ten o'clock.That day Nicholas Rostov received a letter from Boris, telling him thatthe Ismaylov regiment was quartered for the night ten miles from Olmutzand that he wanted to see him as he had a letter and money for him.Rostov was particularly in need of money now that the troops, aftertheir active service, were stationed near Olmutz and the camp swarmedwith well-provisioned sutlers and Austrian Jews offering all sorts oftempting wares. The Pavlograds held feast after feast, celebratingawards they had received for the campaign, and made expeditions toOlmutz to visit a certain Caroline the Hungarian, who had recentlyopened a restaurant there with girls as waitresses. Rostov, who had justcelebrated his promotion to a cornetcy and bought Denisov's horse,Bedouin, was in debt all round, to his comrades and the sutlers. Onreceiving Boris' letter he rode with a fellow officer to Olmutz, dinedthere, drank a bottle of wine, and then set off alone to the Guards'camp to find his old playmate. Rostov had not yet had time to get hisuniform. He had on a shabby cadet jacket, decorated with a soldier'scross, equally shabby cadet's riding breeches lined with worn leather,and an officer's saber with a sword knot. The Don horse he was ridingwas one he had bought from a Cossack during the campaign, and he wore acrumpled hussar cap stuck jauntily back on one side of his head. As herode up to the camp he thought how he would impress Boris and all hiscomrades of the Guards by his appearance--that of a fighting hussar whohad been under fire.The Guards had made their whole march as if on a pleasure trip, paradingtheir cleanliness and discipline. They had come by easy stages, theirknapsacks conveyed on carts, and the Austrian authorities had providedexcellent dinners for the officers at every halting place. The regimentshad entered and left the town with their bands playing, and by the GrandDuke's orders the men had marched all the way in step (a practice onwhich the Guards prided themselves), the officers on foot and at theirproper posts. Boris had been quartered, and had marched all the way,with Berg who was already in command of a company. Berg, who hadobtained his captaincy during the campaign, had gained the confidence ofhis superiors by his promptitude and accuracy and had arranged his moneymatters very satisfactorily. Boris, during the campaign, had made theacquaintance of many persons who might prove useful to him, and by aletter of recommendation he had brought from Pierre had becomeacquainted with Prince Andrew Bolkonski, through whom he hoped to obtaina post on the commander-in-chief's staff. Berg and Boris, having restedafter yesterday's march, were sitting, clean and neatly dressed, at around table in the clean quarters allotted to them, playing chess. Bergheld a smoking pipe between his knees. Boris, in the accurate waycharacteristic of him, was building a little pyramid of chessmen withhis delicate white fingers while awaiting Berg's move, and watched hisopponent's face, evidently thinking about the game as he always thoughtonly of whatever he was engaged on."Well, how are you going to get out of that?" he remarked."We'll try to," replied Berg, touching a pawn and then removing hishand.At that moment the door opened."Here he is at last!" shouted Rostov. "And Berg too! Oh, youpetisenfans, allay cushay dormir!" he exclaimed, imitating his Russiannurse's French, at which he and Boris used to laugh long ago."Dear me, how you have changed!"Boris rose to meet Rostov, but in doing so did not omit to steady andreplace some chessmen that were falling. He was about to embrace hisfriend, but Nicholas avoided him. With that peculiar feeling of youth,that dread of beaten tracks, and wish to express itself in a mannerdifferent from that of its elders which is often insincere, Nicholaswished to do something special on meeting his friend. He wanted to pinchhim, push him, do anything but kiss him--a thing everybody did. Butnotwithstanding this, Boris embraced him in a quiet, friendly way andkissed him three times.They had not met for nearly half a year and, being at the age when youngmen take their first steps on life's road, each saw immense changes inthe other, quite a new reflection of the society in which they had takenthose first steps. Both had changed greatly since they last met and bothwere in a hurry to show the changes that had taken place in them."Oh, you damned dandies! Clean and fresh as if you'd been to a fete, notlike us sinners of the line," cried Rostov, with martial swagger andwith baritone notes in his voice, new to Boris, pointing to his own mud-bespattered breeches. The German landlady, hearing Rostov's loud voice,popped her head in at the door."Eh, is she pretty?" he asked with a wink."Why do you shout so? You'll frighten them!" said Boris. "I did notexpect you today," he added. "I only sent you the note yesterday byBolkonski--an adjutant of Kutuzov's, who's a friend of mine. I did notthink he would get it to you so quickly.... Well, how are you? Beenunder fire already?" asked Boris.Without answering, Rostov shook the soldier's Cross of St. Georgefastened to the cording of his uniform and, indicating a bandaged arm,glanced at Berg with a smile."As you see," he said."Indeed? Yes, yes!" said Boris, with a smile. "And we too have had asplendid march. You know, of course, that His Imperial Highness rodewith our regiment all the time, so that we had every comfort and everyadvantage. What receptions we had in Poland! What dinners and balls! Ican't tell you. And the Tsarevich was very gracious to all ourofficers."And the two friends told each other of their doings, the one of hishussar revels and life in the fighting line, the other of the pleasuresand advantages of service under members of the Imperial family."Oh, you Guards!" said Rostov. "I say, send for some wine."Boris made a grimace."If you really want it," said he.He went to his bed, drew a purse from under the clean pillow, and sentfor wine."Yes, and I have some money and a letter to give you," he added.Rostov took the letter and, throwing the money on the sofa, put botharms on the table and began to read. After reading a few lines, heglanced angrily at Berg, then, meeting his eyes, hid his face behind theletter."Well, they've sent you a tidy sum," said Berg, eying the heavy pursethat sank into the sofa. "As for us, Count, we get along on our pay. Ican tell you for myself...""I say, Berg, my dear fellow," said Rostov, "when you get a letter fromhome and meet one of your own people whom you want to talk everythingover with, and I happen to be there, I'll go at once, to be out of yourway! Do go somewhere, anywhere... to the devil!" he exclaimed, andimmediately seizing him by the shoulder and looking amiably into hisface, evidently wishing to soften the rudeness of his words, he added,"Don't be hurt, my dear fellow; you know I speak from my heart as to anold acquaintance.""Oh, don't mention it, Count! I quite understand," said Berg, getting upand speaking in a muffled and guttural voice."Go across to our hosts: they invited you," added Boris.Berg put on the cleanest of coats, without a spot or speck of dust,stood before a looking glass and brushed the hair on his templesupwards, in the way affected by the Emperor Alexander, and, havingassured himself from the way Rostov looked at it that his coat had beennoticed, left the room with a pleasant smile."Oh dear, what a beast I am!" muttered Rostov, as he read the letter."Why?""Oh, what a pig I am, not to have written and to have given them such afright! Oh, what a pig I am!" he repeated, flushing suddenly. "Well,have you sent Gabriel for some wine? All right let's have some!"In the letter from his parents was enclosed a letter of recommendationto Bagration which the old countess at Anna Mikhaylovna's advice hadobtained through an acquaintance and sent to her son, asking him to takeit to its destination and make use of it."What nonsense! Much I need it!" said Rostov, throwing the letter underthe table."Why have you thrown that away?" asked Boris."It is some letter of recommendation... what the devil do I want itfor!""Why 'What the devil'?" said Boris, picking it up and reading theaddress. "This letter would be of great use to you.""I want nothing, and I won't be anyone's adjutant.""Why not?" inquired Boris."It's a lackey's job!""You are still the same dreamer, I see," remarked Boris, shaking hishead."And you're still the same diplomatist! But that's not the point...Come, how are you?" asked Rostov."Well, as you see. So far everything's all right, but I confess I shouldmuch like to be an adjutant and not remain at the front.""Why?""Because when once a man starts on military service, he should try tomake as successful a career of it as possible.""Oh, that's it!" said Rostov, evidently thinking of something else.He looked intently and inquiringly into his friend's eyes, evidentlytrying in vain to find the answer to some question.Old Gabriel brought in the wine."Shouldn't we now send for Berg?" asked Boris. "He would drink with you.I can't.""Well, send for him... and how do you get on with that German?" askedRostov, with a contemptuous smile."He is a very, very nice, honest, and pleasant fellow," answered Boris.Again Rostov looked intently into Boris' eyes and sighed. Berg returned,and over the bottle of wine conversation between the three officersbecame animated. The Guardsmen told Rostov of their march and how theyhad been made much of in Russia, Poland, and abroad. They spoke of thesayings and doings of their commander, the Grand Duke, and told storiesof his kindness and irascibility. Berg, as usual, kept silent when thesubject did not relate to himself, but in connection with the stories ofthe Grand Duke's quick temper he related with gusto how in Galicia hehad managed to deal with the Grand Duke when the latter made a tour ofthe regiments and was annoyed at the irregularity of a movement. With apleasant smile Berg related how the Grand Duke had ridden up to him in aviolent passion, shouting: "Arnauts!" ("Arnauts" was the Tsarevich'sfavorite expression when he was in a rage) and called for the companycommander."Would you believe it, Count, I was not at all alarmed, because I knew Iwas right. Without boasting, you know, I may say that I know the ArmyOrders by heart and know the Regulations as well as I do the Lord'sPrayer. So, Count, there never is any negligence in my company, and somy conscience was at ease. I came forward...." (Berg stood up and showedhow he presented himself, with his hand to his cap, and really it wouldhave been difficult for a face to express greater respect and self-complacency than his did.) "Well, he stormed at me, as the saying is,stormed and stormed and stormed! It was not a matter of life but ratherof death, as the saying is. 'Albanians!' and 'devils!' and 'ToSiberia!'" said Berg with a sagacious smile. "I knew I was in the rightso I kept silent; was not that best, Count?... 'Hey, are you dumb?' heshouted. Still I remained silent. And what do you think, Count? The nextday it was not even mentioned in the Orders of the Day. That's whatkeeping one's head means. That's the way, Count," said Berg, lightinghis pipe and emitting rings of smoke."Yes, that was fine," said Rostov, smiling.But Boris noticed that he was preparing to make fun of Berg, andskillfully changed the subject. He asked him to tell them how and wherehe got his wound. This pleased Rostov and he began talking about it, andas he went on became more and more animated. He told them of his SchonGrabern affair, just as those who have taken part in a battle generallydo describe it, that is, as they would like it to have been, as theyhave heard it described by others, and as sounds well, but not at all asit really was. Rostov was a truthful young man and would on no accounthave told a deliberate lie. He began his story meaning to telleverything just as it happened, but imperceptibly, involuntarily, andinevitably he lapsed into falsehood. If he had told the truth to hishearers--who like himself had often heard stories of attacks and hadformed a definite idea of what an attack was and were expecting to hearjust such a story--they would either not have believed him or, stillworse, would have thought that Rostov was himself to blame since whatgenerally happens to the narrators of cavalry attacks had not happenedto him. He could not tell them simply that everyone went at a trot andthat he fell off his horse and sprained his arm and then ran as hard ashe could from a Frenchman into the wood. Besides, to tell everything asit really happened, it would have been necessary to make an effort ofwill to tell only what happened. It is very difficult to tell the truth,and young people are rarely capable of it. His hearers expected a storyof how beside himself and all aflame with excitement, he had flown likea storm at the square, cut his way in, slashed right and left, how hissaber had tasted flesh and he had fallen exhausted, and so on. And so hetold them all that.In the middle of his story, just as he was saying: "You cannot imaginewhat a strange frenzy one experiences during an attack," Prince Andrew,whom Boris was expecting, entered the room. Prince Andrew, who liked tohelp young men, was flattered by being asked for his assistance andbeing well disposed toward Boris, who had managed to please him the daybefore, he wished to do what the young man wanted. Having been sent withpapers from Kutuzov to the Tsarevich, he looked in on Boris, hoping tofind him alone. When he came in and saw an hussar of the line recountinghis military exploits (Prince Andrew could not endure that sort of man),he gave Boris a pleasant smile, frowned as with half-closed eyes helooked at Rostov, bowed slightly and wearily, and sat down languidly onthe sofa: he felt it unpleasant to have dropped in on bad company.Rostov flushed up on noticing this, but he did not care, this was a merestranger. Glancing, however, at Boris, he saw that he too seemed ashamedof the hussar of the line.In spite of Prince Andrew's disagreeable, ironical tone, in spite of thecontempt with which Rostov, from his fighting army point of view,regarded all these little adjutants on the staff of whom the newcomerwas evidently one, Rostov felt confused, blushed, and became silent.Boris inquired what news there might be on the staff, and what, withoutindiscretion, one might ask about our plans."We shall probably advance," replied Bolkonski, evidently reluctant tosay more in the presence of a stranger.Berg took the opportunity to ask, with great politeness, whether, as wasrumored, the allowance of forage money to captains of companies would bedoubled. To this Prince Andrew answered with a smile that he could giveno opinion on such an important government order, and Berg laughedgaily."As to your business," Prince Andrew continued, addressing Boris, "wewill talk of it later" (and he looked round at Rostov). "Come to meafter the review and we will do what is possible."And, having glanced round the room, Prince Andrew turned to Rostov,whose state of unconquerable childish embarrassment now changing toanger he did not condescend to notice, and said: "I think you weretalking of the Schon Grabern affair? Were you there?""I was there," said Rostov angrily, as if intending to insult the aide-de-camp.Bolkonski noticed the hussar's state of mind, and it amused him. With aslightly contemptuous smile, he said: "Yes, there are many stories nowtold about that affair!""Yes, stories!" repeated Rostov loudly, looking with eyes suddenly grownfurious, now at Boris, now at Bolkonski. "Yes, many stories! But ourstories are the stories of men who have been under the enemy's fire! Ourstories have some weight, not like the stories of those fellows on thestaff who get rewards without doing anything!""Of whom you imagine me to be one?" said Prince Andrew, with a quiet andparticularly amiable smile.A strange feeling of exasperation and yet of respect for this man'sself-possession mingled at that moment in Rostov's soul."I am not talking about you," he said, "I don't know you and, frankly, Idon't want to. I am speaking of the staff in general.""And I will tell you this," Prince Andrew interrupted in a tone of quietauthority, "you wish to insult me, and I am ready to agree with you thatit would be very easy to do so if you haven't sufficient self-respect,but admit that the time and place are very badly chosen. In a day or twowe shall all have to take part in a greater and more serious duel, andbesides, Drubetskoy, who says he is an old friend of yours, is not atall to blame that my face has the misfortune to displease you. However,"he added rising, "you know my name and where to find me, but don'tforget that I do not regard either myself or you as having been at allinsulted, and as a man older than you, my advice is to let the matterdrop. Well then, on Friday after the review I shall expect you,Drubetskoy. Au revoir!" exclaimed Prince Andrew, and with a bow to themboth he went out.Only when Prince Andrew was gone did Rostov think of what he ought tohave said. And he was still more angry at having omitted to say it. Heordered his horse at once and, coldly taking leave of Boris, rode home.Should he go to headquarters next day and challenge that affectedadjutant, or really let the matter drop, was the question that worriedhim all the way. He thought angrily of the pleasure he would have atseeing the fright of that small and frail but proud man when covered byhis pistol, and then he felt with surprise that of all the men he knewthere was none he would so much like to have for a friend as that veryadjutant whom he so hated.CHAPTER VIIIThe day after Rostov had been to see Boris, a review was held of theAustrian and Russian troops, both those freshly arrived from Russia andthose who had been campaigning under Kutuzov. The two Emperors, theRussian with his heir the Tsarevich, and the Austrian with the Archduke,inspected the allied army of eighty thousand men.From early morning the smart clean troops were on the move, forming upon the field before the fortress. Now thousands of feet and bayonetsmoved and halted at the officers' command, turned with banners flying,formed up at intervals, and wheeled round other similar masses ofinfantry in different uniforms; now was heard the rhythmic beat of hoofsand the jingling of showy cavalry in blue, red, and green braideduniforms, with smartly dressed bandsmen in front mounted on black, roan,or gray horses; then again, spreading out with the brazen clatter of thepolished shining cannon that quivered on the gun carriages and with thesmell of linstocks, came the artillery which crawled between theinfantry and cavalry and took up its appointed position. Not only thegenerals in full parade uniforms, with their thin or thick waists drawnin to the utmost, their red necks squeezed into their stiff collars, andwearing scarves and all their decorations, not only the elegant, pomadedofficers, but every soldier with his freshly washed and shaven face andhis weapons clean and polished to the utmost, and every horse groomedtill its coat shone like satin and every hair of its wetted mane laysmooth--felt that no small matter was happening, but an important andsolemn affair. Every general and every soldier was conscious of his owninsignificance, aware of being but a drop in that ocean of men, and yetat the same time was conscious of his strength as a part of thatenormous whole.From early morning strenuous activities and efforts had begun and by teno'clock all had been brought into due order. The ranks were drawn up onthe vast field. The whole army was extended in three lines: the cavalryin front, behind it the artillery, and behind that again the infantry.A space like a street was left between each two lines of troops. Thethree parts of that army were sharply distinguished: Kutuzov's fightingarmy (with the Pavlograds on the right flank of the front); thoserecently arrived from Russia, both Guards and regiments of the line; andthe Austrian troops. But they all stood in the same lines, under onecommand, and in a like order.Like wind over leaves ran an excited whisper: "They're coming! They'recoming!" Alarmed voices were heard, and a stir of final preparationswept over all the troops.From the direction of Olmutz in front of them, a group was seenapproaching. And at that moment, though the day was still, a light gustof wind blowing over the army slightly stirred the streamers on thelances and the unfolded standards fluttered against their staffs. Itlooked as if by that slight motion the army itself was expressing itsjoy at the approach of the Emperors. One voice was heard shouting: "Eyesfront!" Then, like the crowing of cocks at sunrise, this was repeated byothers from various sides and all became silent.In the deathlike stillness only the tramp of horses was heard. This wasthe Emperors' suites. The Emperors rode up to the flank, and thetrumpets of the first cavalry regiment played the general march. Itseemed as though not the trumpeters were playing, but as if the armyitself, rejoicing at the Emperors' approach, had naturally burst intomusic. Amid these sounds, only the youthful kindly voice of the EmperorAlexander was clearly heard. He gave the words of greeting, and thefirst regiment roared "Hurrah!" so deafeningly, continuously, andjoyfully that the men themselves were awed by their multitude and theimmensity of the power they constituted.Rostov, standing in the front lines of Kutuzov's army which the Tsarapproached first, experienced the same feeling as every other man inthat army: a feeling of self-forgetfulness, a proud consciousness ofmight, and a passionate attraction to him who was the cause of thistriumph.He felt that at a single word from that man all this vast mass (and hehimself an insignificant atom in it) would go through fire and water,commit crime, die, or perform deeds of highest heroism, and so he couldnot but tremble and his heart stand still at the imminence of that word."Hurrah! Hurrah! Hurrah!" thundered from all sides, one regiment afteranother greeting the Tsar with the strains of the march, and then"Hurrah!"... Then the general march, and again "Hurrah! Hurrah!" growingever stronger and fuller and merging into a deafening roar.Till the Tsar reached it, each regiment in its silence and immobilityseemed like a lifeless body, but as soon as he came up it became alive,its thunder joining the roar of the whole line along which he hadalready passed. Through the terrible and deafening roar of those voices,amid the square masses of troops standing motionless as if turned tostone, hundreds of riders composing the suites moved carelessly butsymmetrically and above all freely, and in front of them two men--theEmperors. Upon them the undivided, tensely passionate attention of thatwhole mass of men was concentrated.The handsome young Emperor Alexander, in the uniform of the HorseGuards, wearing a cocked hat with its peaks front and back, with hispleasant face and resonant though not loud voice, attracted everyone'sattention.Rostov was not far from the trumpeters, and with his keen sight hadrecognized the Tsar and watched his approach. When he was within twentypaces, and Nicholas could clearly distinguish every detail of hishandsome, happy young face, he experienced a feeling of tenderness andecstasy such as he had never before known. Every trait and everymovement of the Tsar's seemed to him enchanting.Stopping in front of the Pavlograds, the Tsar said something in Frenchto the Austrian Emperor and smiled.Seeing that smile, Rostov involuntarily smiled himself and felt a stillstronger flow of love for his sovereign. He longed to show that love insome way and knowing that this was impossible was ready to cry. The Tsarcalled the colonel of the regiment and said a few words to him."Oh God, what would happen to me if the Emperor spoke to me?" thoughtRostov. "I should die of happiness!"The Tsar addressed the officers also: "I thank you all, gentlemen, Ithank you with my whole heart." To Rostov every word sounded like avoice from heaven. How gladly would he have died at once for his Tsar!"You have earned the St. George's standards and will be worthy of them.""Oh, to die, to die for him," thought Rostov.The Tsar said something more which Rostov did not hear, and thesoldiers, straining their lungs, shouted "Hurrah!"Rostov too, bending over his saddle, shouted "Hurrah!" with all hismight, feeling that he would like to injure himself by that shout, ifonly to express his rapture fully.The Tsar stopped a few minutes in front of the hussars as if undecided."How can the Emperor be undecided?" thought Rostov, but then even thisindecision appeared to him majestic and enchanting, like everything elsethe Tsar did.That hesitation lasted only an instant. The Tsar's foot, in the narrowpointed boot then fashionable, touched the groin of the bobtailed baymare he rode, his hand in a white glove gathered up the reins, and hemoved off accompanied by an irregularly swaying sea of aides-de-camp.Farther and farther he rode away, stopping at other regiments, till atlast only his white plumes were visible to Rostov from amid the suitesthat surrounded the Emperors.Among the gentlemen of the suite, Rostov noticed Bolkonski, sitting hishorse indolently and carelessly. Rostov recalled their quarrel ofyesterday and the question presented itself whether he ought or oughtnot to challenge Bolkonski. "Of course not!" he now thought. "Is itworth thinking or speaking of it at such a moment? At a time of suchlove, such rapture, and such self-sacrifice, what do any of our quarrelsand affronts matter? I love and forgive everybody now."When the Emperor had passed nearly all the regiments, the troops began aceremonial march past him, and Rostov on Bedouin, recently purchasedfrom Denisov, rode past too, at the rear of his squadron--that is, aloneand in full view of the Emperor.Before he reached him, Rostov, who was a splendid horseman, spurredBedouin twice and successfully put him to the showy trot in which theanimal went when excited. Bending his foaming muzzle to his chest, histail extended, Bedouin, as if also conscious of the Emperor's eye uponhim, passed splendidly, lifting his feet with a high and gracefulaction, as if flying through the air without touching the ground.Rostov himself, his legs well back and his stomach drawn in and feelinghimself one with his horse, rode past the Emperor with a frowning butblissful face "like a vewy devil," as Denisov expressed it."Fine fellows, the Pavlograds!" remarked the Emperor."My God, how happy I should be if he ordered me to leap into the firethis instant!" thought Rostov.When the review was over, the newly arrived officers, and alsoKutuzov's, collected in groups and began to talk about the awards, aboutthe Austrians and their uniforms, about their lines, about Bonaparte,and how badly the latter would fare now, especially if the Essen corpsarrived and Prussia took our side.But the talk in every group was chiefly about the Emperor Alexander. Hisevery word and movement was described with ecstasy.They all had but one wish: to advance as soon as possible against theenemy under the Emperor's command. Commanded by the Emperor himself theycould not fail to vanquish anyone, be it whom it might: so thoughtRostov and most of the officers after the review.All were then more confident of victory than the winning of two battleswould have made them.CHAPTER IXThe day after the review, Boris, in his best uniform and with hiscomrade Berg's best wishes for success, rode to Olmutz to see Bolkonski,wishing to profit by his friendliness and obtain for himself the bestpost he could--preferably that of adjutant to some important personage,a position in the army which seemed to him most attractive. "It is allvery well for Rostov, whose father sends him ten thousand rubles at atime, to talk about not wishing to cringe to anybody and not be anyone'slackey, but I who have nothing but my brains have to make a career andmust not miss opportunities, but must avail myself of them!" hereflected.He did not find Prince Andrew in Olmutz that day, but the appearance ofthe town where the headquarters and the diplomatic corps were stationedand the two Emperors were living with their suites, households, andcourts only strengthened his desire to belong to that higher world.He knew no one, and despite his smart Guardsman's uniform, all theseexalted personages passing in the streets in their elegant carriageswith their plumes, ribbons, and medals, both courtiers and military men,seemed so immeasurably above him, an insignificant officer of theGuards, that they not only did not wish to, but simply could not, beaware of his existence. At the quarters of the commander-in-chief,Kutuzov, where he inquired for Bolkonski, all the adjutants and even theorderlies looked at him as if they wished to impress on him that a greatmany officers like him were always coming there and that everybody washeartily sick of them. In spite of this, or rather because of it, nextday, November 15, after dinner he again went to Olmutz and, entering thehouse occupied by Kutuzov, asked for Bolkonski. Prince Andrew was in andBoris was shown into a large hall probably formerly used for dancing,but in which five beds now stood, and furniture of various kinds: atable, chairs, and a clavichord. One adjutant, nearest the door, wassitting at the table in a Persian dressing gown, writing. Another, thered, stout Nesvitski, lay on a bed with his arms under his head,laughing with an officer who had sat down beside him. A third wasplaying a Viennese waltz on the clavichord, while a fourth, lying on theclavichord, sang the tune. Bolkonski was not there. None of thesegentlemen changed his position on seeing Boris. The one who was writingand whom Boris addressed turned round crossly and told him Bolkonski wason duty and that he should go through the door on the left into thereception room if he wished to see him. Boris thanked him and went tothe reception room, where he found some ten officers and generals.When he entered, Prince Andrew, his eyes drooping contemptuously (withthat peculiar expression of polite weariness which plainly says, "If itwere not my duty I would not talk to you for a moment"), was listeningto an old Russian general with decorations, who stood very erect, almoston tiptoe, with a soldier's obsequious expression on his purple face,reporting something."Very well, then, be so good as to wait," said Prince Andrew to thegeneral, in Russian, speaking with the French intonation he affectedwhen he wished to speak contemptuously, and noticing Boris, PrinceAndrew, paying no more heed to the general who ran after him imploringhim to hear something more, nodded and turned to him with a cheerfulsmile.At that moment Boris clearly realized what he had before surmised, thatin the army, besides the subordination and discipline prescribed in themilitary code, which he and the others knew in the regiment, there wasanother, more important, subordination, which made this tight-laced,purple-faced general wait respectfully while Captain Prince Andrew, forhis own pleasure, chose to chat with Lieutenant Drubetskoy. More thanever was Boris resolved to serve in future not according to the writtencode, but under this unwritten law. He felt now that merely by havingbeen recommended to Prince Andrew he had already risen above the generalwho at the front had the power to annihilate him, a lieutenant of theGuards. Prince Andrew came up to him and took his hand."I am very sorry you did not find me in yesterday. I was fussing aboutwith Germans all day. We went with Weyrother to survey the dispositions.When Germans start being accurate, there's no end to it!"Boris smiled, as if he understood what Prince Andrew was alluding to assomething generally known. But it was the first time he had heardWeyrother's name, or even the term "dispositions.""Well, my dear fellow, so you still want to be an adjutant? I have beenthinking about you.""Yes, I was thinking"--for some reason Boris could not help blushing--"of asking the commander-in-chief. He has had a letter from PrinceKuragin about me. I only wanted to ask because I fear the Guards won'tbe in action," he added as if in apology."All right, all right. We'll talk it over," replied Prince Andrew. "Onlylet me report this gentleman's business, and I shall be at yourdisposal."While Prince Andrew went to report about the purple-faced general, thatgentleman--evidently not sharing Boris' conception of the advantages ofthe unwritten code of subordination--looked so fixedly at thepresumptuous lieutenant who had prevented his finishing what he had tosay to the adjutant that Boris felt uncomfortable. He turned away andwaited impatiently for Prince Andrew's return from the commander-in-chief's room."You see, my dear fellow, I have been thinking about you," said PrinceAndrew when they had gone into the large room where the clavichord was."It's no use your going to the commander-in-chief. He would say a lot ofpleasant things, ask you to dinner" ("That would not be bad as regardsthe unwritten code," thought Boris), "but nothing more would come of it.There will soon be a battalion of us aides-de-camp and adjutants! Butthis is what we'll do: I have a good friend, an adjutant general and anexcellent fellow, Prince Dolgorukov; and though you may not know it, thefact is that now Kutuzov with his staff and all of us count for nothing.Everything is now centered round the Emperor. So we will go toDolgorukov; I have to go there anyhow and I have already spoken to himabout you. We shall see whether he cannot attach you to himself or finda place for you somewhere nearer the sun."Prince Andrew always became specially keen when he had to guide a youngman and help him to worldly success. Under cover of obtaining help ofthis kind for another, which from pride he would never accept forhimself, he kept in touch with the circle which confers success andwhich attracted him. He very readily took up Boris' cause and went withhim to Dolgorukov.It was late in the evening when they entered the palace at Olmutzoccupied by the Emperors and their retinues.That same day a council of war had been held in which all the members ofthe Hofkriegsrath and both Emperors took part. At that council, contraryto the views of the old generals Kutuzov and Prince Schwartzenberg, ithad been decided to advance immediately and give battle to Bonaparte.The council of war was just over when Prince Andrew accompanied by Borisarrived at the palace to find Dolgorukov. Everyone at headquarters wasstill under the spell of the day's council, at which the party of theyoung had triumphed. The voices of those who counseled delay and advisedwaiting for something else before advancing had been so completelysilenced and their arguments confuted by such conclusive evidence of theadvantages of attacking that what had been discussed at the council--thecoming battle and the victory that would certainly result from it--nolonger seemed to be in the future but in the past. All the advantageswere on our side. Our enormous forces, undoubtedly superior toNapoleon's, were concentrated in one place, the troops inspired by theEmperors' presence were eager for action. The strategic position wherethe operations would take place was familiar in all its details to theAustrian General Weyrother: a lucky accident had ordained that theAustrian army should maneuver the previous year on the very fields wherethe French had now to be fought; the adjacent locality was known andshown in every detail on the maps, and Bonaparte, evidently weakened,was undertaking nothing.Dolgorukov, one of the warmest advocates of an attack, had just returnedfrom the council, tired and exhausted but eager and proud of the victorythat had been gained. Prince Andrew introduced his protege, but PrinceDolgorukov politely and firmly pressing his hand said nothing to Borisand, evidently unable to suppress the thoughts which were uppermost inhis mind at that moment, addressed Prince Andrew in French."Ah, my dear fellow, what a battle we have gained! God grant that theone that will result from it will be as victorious! However, dearfellow," he said abruptly and eagerly, "I must confess to having beenunjust to the Austrians and especially to Weyrother. What exactitude,what minuteness, what knowledge of the locality, what foresight forevery eventuality, every possibility even to the smallest detail! No, mydear fellow, no conditions better than our present ones could have beendevised. This combination of Austrian precision with Russian valor--whatmore could be wished for?""So the attack is definitely resolved on?" asked Bolkonski."And do you know, my dear fellow, it seems to me that Bonaparte hasdecidedly lost bearings, you know that a letter was received from himtoday for the Emperor." Dolgorukov smiled significantly."Is that so? And what did he say?" inquired Bolkonski."What can he say? Tra-di-ri-di-ra and so on... merely to gain time. Itell you he is in our hands, that's certain! But what was most amusing,"he continued, with a sudden, good-natured laugh, "was that we could notthink how to address the reply! If not as 'Consul' and of course not as'Emperor,' it seemed to me it should be to 'General Bonaparte.'""But between not recognizing him as Emperor and calling him GeneralBonaparte, there is a difference," remarked Bolkonski."That's just it," interrupted Dolgorukov quickly, laughing. "You knowBilibin--he's a very clever fellow. He suggested addressing him as'Usurper and Enemy of Mankind.'"Dolgorukov laughed merrily."Only that?" said Bolkonski."All the same, it was Bilibin who found a suitable form for the address.He is a wise and clever fellow.""What was it?""To the Head of the French Government... Au chef du gouvernementfrancais," said Dolgorukov, with grave satisfaction. "Good, wasn't it?""Yes, but he will dislike it extremely," said Bolkonski."Oh yes, very much! My brother knows him, he's dined with him--thepresent Emperor--more than once in Paris, and tells me he never met amore cunning or subtle diplomatist--you know, a combination of Frenchadroitness and Italian play-acting! Do you know the tale about him andCount Markov? Count Markov was the only man who knew how to handle him.You know the story of the handkerchief? It is delightful!"And the talkative Dolgorukov, turning now to Boris, now to PrinceAndrew, told how Bonaparte wishing to test Markov, our ambassador,purposely dropped a handkerchief in front of him and stood looking atMarkov, probably expecting Markov to pick it up for him, and how Markovimmediately dropped his own beside it and picked it up without touchingBonaparte's."Delightful!" said Bolkonski. "But I have come to you, Prince, as apetitioner on behalf of this young man. You see..." but before PrinceAndrew could finish, an aide-de-camp came in to summon Dolgorukov to theEmperor."Oh, what a nuisance," said Dolgorukov, getting up hurriedly andpressing the hands of Prince Andrew and Boris. "You know I should bevery glad to do all in my power both for you and for this dear youngman." Again he pressed the hand of the latter with an expression ofgood-natured, sincere, and animated levity. "But you see... anothertime!"Boris was excited by the thought of being so close to the higher powersas he felt himself to be at that moment. He was conscious that here hewas in contact with the springs that set in motion the enormousmovements of the mass of which in his regiment he felt himself a tiny,obedient, and insignificant atom. They followed Prince Dolgorukov outinto the corridor and met--coming out of the door of the Emperor's roomby which Dolgorukov had entered--a short man in civilian clothes with aclever face and sharply projecting jaw which, without spoiling his face,gave him a peculiar vivacity and shiftiness of expression. This shortman nodded to Dolgorukov as to an intimate friend and stared at PrinceAndrew with cool intensity, walking straight toward him and evidentlyexpecting him to bow or to step out of his way. Prince Andrew didneither: a look of animosity appeared on his face and the other turnedaway and went down the side of the corridor."Who was that?" asked Boris."He is one of the most remarkable, but to me most unpleasant of men--theMinister of Foreign Affairs, Prince Adam Czartoryski.... It is such menas he who decide the fate of nations," added Bolkonski with a sigh hecould not suppress, as they passed out of the palace.Next day, the army began its campaign, and up to the very battle ofAusterlitz, Boris was unable to see either Prince Andrew or Dolgorukovagain and remained for a while with the Ismaylov regiment.CHAPTER XAt dawn on the sixteenth of November, Denisov's squadron, in whichNicholas Rostov served and which was in Prince Bagration's detachment,moved from the place where it had spent the night, advancing into actionas arranged, and after going behind other columns for about two thirdsof a mile was stopped on the highroad. Rostov saw the Cossacks and thenthe first and second squadrons of hussars and infantry battalions andartillery pass by and go forward and then Generals Bagration andDolgorukov ride past with their adjutants. All the fear before actionwhich he had experienced as previously, all the inner struggle toconquer that fear, all his dreams of distinguishing himself as a truehussar in this battle, had been wasted. Their squadron remained inreserve and Nicholas Rostov spent that day in a dull and wretched mood.At nine in the morning, he heard firing in front and shouts of hurrah,and saw wounded being brought back (there were not many of them), and atlast he saw how a whole detachment of French cavalry was brought in,convoyed by a sotnya of Cossacks. Evidently the affair was over and,though not big, had been a successful engagement. The men and officersreturning spoke of a brilliant victory, of the occupation of the town ofWischau and the capture of a whole French squadron. The day was brightand sunny after a sharp night frost, and the cheerful glitter of thatautumn day was in keeping with the news of victory which was conveyed,not only by the tales of those who had taken part in it, but also by thejoyful expression on the faces of soldiers, officers, generals, andadjutants, as they passed Rostov going or coming. And Nicholas, who hadvainly suffered all the dread that precedes a battle and had spent thathappy day in inactivity, was all the more depressed."Come here, Wostov. Let's dwink to dwown our gwief!" shouted Denisov,who had settled down by the roadside with a flask and some food.The officers gathered round Denisov's canteen, eating and talking."There! They are bringing another!" cried one of the officers,indicating a captive French dragoon who was being brought in on foot bytwo Cossacks.One of them was leading by the bridle a fine large French horse he hadtaken from the prisoner."Sell us that horse!" Denisov called out to the Cossacks."If you like, your honor!"The officers got up and stood round the Cossacks and their prisoner. TheFrench dragoon was a young Alsatian who spoke French with a Germanaccent. He was breathless with agitation, his face was red, and when heheard some French spoken he at once began speaking to the officers,addressing first one, then another. He said he would not have beentaken, it was not his fault but the corporal's who had sent him to seizesome horsecloths, though he had told him the Russians were there. And atevery word he added: "But don't hurt my little horse!" and stroked theanimal. It was plain that he did not quite grasp where he was. Now heexcused himself for having been taken prisoner and now, imagininghimself before his own officers, insisted on his soldierly disciplineand zeal in the service. He brought with him into our rearguard all thefreshness of atmosphere of the French army, which was so alien to us.The Cossacks sold the horse for two gold pieces, and Rostov, being therichest of the officers now that he had received his money, bought it."But don't hurt my little horse!" said the Alsatian good-naturedly toRostov when the animal was handed over to the hussar.Rostov smilingly reassured the dragoon and gave him money."Alley! Alley!" said the Cossack, touching the prisoner's arm to makehim go on."The Emperor! The Emperor!" was suddenly heard among the hussars.All began to run and bustle, and Rostov saw coming up the road behindhim several riders with white plumes in their hats. In a moment everyonewas in his place, waiting.Rostov did not know or remember how he ran to his place and mounted.Instantly his regret at not having been in action and his dejected moodamid people of whom he was weary had gone, instantly every thought ofhimself had vanished. He was filled with happiness at his nearness tothe Emperor. He felt that this nearness by itself made up to him for theday he had lost. He was happy as a lover when the longed-for moment ofmeeting arrives. Not daring to look round and without looking round, hewas ecstatically conscious of his approach. He felt it not only from thesound of the hoofs of the approaching cavalcade, but because as he drewnear everything grew brighter, more joyful, more significant, and morefestive around him. Nearer and nearer to Rostov came that sun sheddingbeams of mild and majestic light around, and already he felt himselfenveloped in those beams, he heard his voice, that kindly, calm, andmajestic voice that was yet so simple! And as if in accord with Rostov'sfeeling, there was a deathly stillness amid which was heard theEmperor's voice."The Pavlograd hussars?" he inquired."The reserves, sire!" replied a voice, a very human one compared to thatwhich had said: "The Pavlograd hussars?"The Emperor drew level with Rostov and halted. Alexander's face was evenmore beautiful than it had been three days before at the review. Itshone with such gaiety and youth, such innocent youth, that it suggestedthe liveliness of a fourteen-year-old boy, and yet it was the face ofthe majestic Emperor. Casually, while surveying the squadron, theEmperor's eyes met Rostov's and rested on them for not more than twoseconds. Whether or no the Emperor understood what was going on inRostov's soul (it seemed to Rostov that he understood everything), atany rate his light-blue eyes gazed for about two seconds into Rostov'sface. A gentle, mild light poured from them. Then all at once he raisedhis eyebrows, abruptly touched his horse with his left foot, andgalloped on.The younger Emperor could not restrain his wish to be present at thebattle and, in spite of the remonstrances of his courtiers, at twelveo'clock left the third column with which he had been and galloped towardthe vanguard. Before he came up with the hussars, several adjutants methim with news of the successful result of the action.This battle, which consisted in the capture of a French squadron, wasrepresented as a brilliant victory over the French, and so the Emperorand the whole army, especially while the smoke hung over thebattlefield, believed that the French had been defeated and wereretreating against their will. A few minutes after the Emperor hadpassed, the Pavlograd division was ordered to advance. In Wischauitself, a petty German town, Rostov saw the Emperor again. In the marketplace, where there had been some rather heavy firing before theEmperor's arrival, lay several killed and wounded soldiers whom therehad not been time to move. The Emperor, surrounded by his suite ofofficers and courtiers, was riding a bobtailed chestnut mare, adifferent one from that which he had ridden at the review, and bendingto one side he gracefully held a gold lorgnette to his eyes and lookedat a soldier who lay prone, with blood on his uncovered head. Thewounded soldier was so dirty, coarse, and revolting that his proximityto the Emperor shocked Rostov. Rostov saw how the Emperor's rather roundshoulders shuddered as if a cold shiver had run down them, how his leftfoot began convulsively tapping the horse's side with the spur, and howthe well-trained horse looked round unconcerned and did not stir. Anadjutant, dismounting, lifted the soldier under the arms to place him ona stretcher that had been brought. The soldier groaned."Gently, gently! Can't you do it more gently?" said the Emperorapparently suffering more than the dying soldier, and he rode away.Rostov saw tears filling the Emperor's eyes and heard him, as he wasriding away, say to Czartoryski: "What a terrible thing war is: what aterrible thing! Quelle terrible chose que la guerre!"The troops of the vanguard were stationed before Wischau, within sightof the enemy's lines, which all day long had yielded ground to us at theleast firing. The Emperor's gratitude was announced to the vanguard,rewards were promised, and the men received a double ration of vodka.The campfires crackled and the soldiers' songs resounded even moremerrily than on the previous night. Denisov celebrated his promotion tothe rank of major, and Rostov, who had already drunk enough, at the endof the feast proposed the Emperor's health. "Not 'our Sovereign, theEmperor,' as they say at official dinners," said he, "but the health ofour Sovereign, that good, enchanting, and great man! Let us drink to hishealth and to the certain defeat of the French!""If we fought before," he said, "not letting the French pass, as atSchon Grabern, what shall we not do now when he is at the front? We willall die for him gladly! Is it not so, gentlemen? Perhaps I am not sayingit right, I have drunk a good deal--but that is how I feel, and so doyou too! To the health of Alexander the First! Hurrah!""Hurrah!" rang the enthusiastic voices of the officers.And the old cavalry captain, Kirsten, shouted enthusiastically and noless sincerely than the twenty-year-old Rostov.When the officers had emptied and smashed their glasses, Kirsten filledothers and, in shirt sleeves and breeches, went glass in hand to thesoldiers' bonfires and with his long gray mustache, his white chestshowing under his open shirt, he stood in a majestic pose in the lightof the campfire, waving his uplifted arm."Lads! here's to our Sovereign, the Emperor, and victory over ourenemies! Hurrah!" he exclaimed in his dashing, old, hussar's baritone.The hussars crowded round and responded heartily with loud shouts.Late that night, when all had separated, Denisov with his short handpatted his favorite, Rostov, on the shoulder."As there's no one to fall in love with on campaign, he's fallen in lovewith the Tsar," he said."Denisov, don't make fun of it!" cried Rostov. "It is such a lofty,beautiful feeling, such a...""I believe it, I believe it, fwiend, and I share and appwove...""No, you don't understand!"And Rostov got up and went wandering among the campfires, dreaming ofwhat happiness it would be to die--not in saving the Emperor's life (hedid not even dare to dream of that), but simply to die before his eyes.He really was in love with the Tsar and the glory of the Russian armsand the hope of future triumph. And he was not the only man toexperience that feeling during those memorable days preceding the battleof Austerlitz: nine tenths of the men in the Russian army were then inlove, though less ecstatically, with their Tsar and the glory of theRussian arms.CHAPTER XIThe next day the Emperor stopped at Wischau, and Villier, his physician,was repeatedly summoned to see him. At headquarters and among the troopsnear by the news spread that the Emperor was unwell. He ate nothing andhad slept badly that night, those around him reported. The cause of thisindisposition was the strong impression made on his sensitive mind bythe sight of the killed and wounded.At daybreak on the seventeenth, a French officer who had come with aflag of truce, demanding an audience with the Russian Emperor, wasbrought into Wischau from our outposts. This officer was Savary. TheEmperor had only just fallen asleep and so Savary had to wait. At middayhe was admitted to the Emperor, and an hour later he rode off withPrince Dolgorukov to the advanced post of the French army.It was rumored that Savary had been sent to propose to Alexander ameeting with Napoleon. To the joy and pride of the whole army, apersonal interview was refused, and instead of the Sovereign, PrinceDolgorukov, the victor at Wischau, was sent with Savary to negotiatewith Napoleon if, contrary to expectations, these negotiations wereactuated by a real desire for peace.Toward evening Dolgorukov came back, went straight to the Tsar, andremained alone with him for a long time.On the eighteenth and nineteenth of November, the army advanced twodays' march and the enemy's outposts after a brief interchange of shotsretreated. In the highest army circles from midday on the nineteenth, agreat, excitedly bustling activity began which lasted till the morningof the twentieth, when the memorable battle of Austerlitz was fought.Till midday on the nineteenth, the activity--the eager talk, running toand fro, and dispatching of adjutants--was confined to the Emperor'sheadquarters. But on the afternoon of that day, this activity reachedKutuzov's headquarters and the staffs of the commanders of columns. Byevening, the adjutants had spread it to all ends and parts of the army,and in the night from the nineteenth to the twentieth, the whole eightythousand allied troops rose from their bivouacs to the hum of voices,and the army swayed and started in one enormous mass six miles long.The concentrated activity which had begun at the Emperor's headquartersin the morning and had started the whole movement that followed was likethe first movement of the main wheel of a large tower clock. One wheelslowly moved, another was set in motion, and a third, and wheels beganto revolve faster and faster, levers and cogwheels to work, chimes toplay, figures to pop out, and the hands to advance with regular motionas a result of all that activity.Just as in the mechanism of a clock, so in the mechanism of the militarymachine, an impulse once given leads to the final result; and just asindifferently quiescent till the moment when motion is transmitted tothem are the parts of the mechanism which the impulse has not yetreached. Wheels creak on their axles as the cogs engage one another andthe revolving pulleys whirr with the rapidity of their movement, but aneighboring wheel is as quiet and motionless as though it were preparedto remain so for a hundred years; but the moment comes when the levercatches it and obeying the impulse that wheel begins to creak and joinsin the common motion the result and aim of which are beyond its ken.Just as in a clock, the result of the complicated motion of innumerablewheels and pulleys is merely a slow and regular movement of the handswhich show the time, so the result of all the complicated humanactivities of 160,000 Russians and French--all their passions, desires,remorse, humiliations, sufferings, outbursts of pride, fear, andenthusiasm--was only the loss of the battle of Austerlitz, the so-calledbattle of the three Emperors--that is to say, a slow movement of thehand on the dial of human history.Prince Andrew was on duty that day and in constant attendance on thecommander-in-chief.At six in the evening, Kutuzov went to the Emperor's headquarters andafter staying but a short time with the Tsar went to see the grandmarshal of the court, Count Tolstoy.Bolkonski took the opportunity to go in to get some details of thecoming action from Dolgorukov. He felt that Kutuzov was upset anddissatisfied about something and that at headquarters they weredissatisfied with him, and also that at the Emperor's headquarterseveryone adopted toward him the tone of men who know something others donot know: he therefore wished to speak to Dolgorukov."Well, how d'you do, my dear fellow?" said Dolgorukov, who was sittingat tea with Bilibin. "The fete is for tomorrow. How is your old fellow?Out of sorts?""I won't say he is out of sorts, but I fancy he would like to be heard.""But they heard him at the council of war and will hear him when hetalks sense, but to temporize and wait for something now when Bonapartefears nothing so much as a general battle is impossible.""Yes, you have seen him?" said Prince Andrew. "Well, what is Bonapartelike? How did he impress you?""Yes, I saw him, and am convinced that he fears nothing so much as ageneral engagement," repeated Dolgorukov, evidently prizing this generalconclusion which he had arrived at from his interview with Napoleon. "Ifhe weren't afraid of a battle why did he ask for that interview? Whynegotiate, and above all why retreat, when to retreat is so contrary tohis method of conducting war? Believe me, he is afraid, afraid of ageneral battle. His hour has come! Mark my words!""But tell me, what is he like, eh?" said Prince Andrew again."He is a man in a gray overcoat, very anxious that I should call him'Your Majesty,' but who, to his chagrin, got no title from me! That'sthe sort of man he is, and nothing more," replied Dolgorukov, lookinground at Bilibin with a smile."Despite my great respect for old Kutuzov," he continued, "we should bea nice set of fellows if we were to wait about and so give him a chanceto escape, or to trick us, now that we certainly have him in our hands!No, we mustn't forget Suvorov and his rule--not to put yourself in aposition to be attacked, but yourself to attack. Believe me in war theenergy of young men often shows the way better than all the experienceof old Cunctators.""But in what position are we going to attack him? I have been at theoutposts today and it is impossible to say where his chief forces aresituated," said Prince Andrew.He wished to explain to Dolgorukov a plan of attack he had himselfformed."Oh, that is all the same," Dolgorukov said quickly, and getting up hespread a map on the table. "All eventualities have been foreseen. If heis standing before Brunn..."And Prince Dolgorukov rapidly but indistinctly explained Weyrother'splan of a flanking movement.Prince Andrew began to reply and to state his own plan, which might havebeen as good as Weyrother's, but for the disadvantage that Weyrother'shad already been approved. As soon as Prince Andrew began to demonstratethe defects of the latter and the merits of his own plan, PrinceDolgorukov ceased to listen to him and gazed absent-mindedly not at themap, but at Prince Andrew's face."There will be a council of war at Kutuzov's tonight, though; you cansay all this there," remarked Dolgorukov."I will do so," said Prince Andrew, moving away from the map."Whatever are you bothering about, gentlemen?" said Bilibin, who, tillthen, had listened with an amused smile to their conversation and nowwas evidently ready with a joke. "Whether tomorrow brings victory ordefeat, the glory of our Russian arms is secure. Except your Kutuzov,there is not a single Russian in command of a column! The commandersare: Herr General Wimpfen, le Comte de Langeron, le Prince deLichtenstein, le Prince, de Hohenlohe, and finally Prishprish, and so onlike all those Polish names.""Be quiet, backbiter!" said Dolgorukov. "It is not true; there are nowtwo Russians, Miloradovich, and Dokhturov, and there would be a third,Count Arakcheev, if his nerves were not too weak.""However, I think General Kutuzov has come out," said Prince Andrew. "Iwish you good luck and success, gentlemen!" he added and went out aftershaking hands with Dolgorukov and Bilibin.On the way home, Prince Andrew could not refrain from asking Kutuzov,who was sitting silently beside him, what he thought of tomorrow'sbattle.Kutuzov looked sternly at his adjutant and, after a pause, replied: "Ithink the battle will be lost, and so I told Count Tolstoy and asked himto tell the Emperor. What do you think he replied? 'But, my deargeneral, I am engaged with rice and cutlets, look after military mattersyourself!' Yes... That was the answer I got!"CHAPTER XIIShortly after nine o'clock that evening, Weyrother drove with his plansto Kutuzov's quarters where the council of war was to be held. All thecommanders of columns were summoned to the commander-in-chief's and withthe exception of Prince Bagration, who declined to come, were all thereat the appointed time.Weyrother, who was in full control of the proposed battle, by hiseagerness and briskness presented a marked contrast to the dissatisfiedand drowsy Kutuzov, who reluctantly played the part of chairman andpresident of the council of war. Weyrother evidently felt himself to beat the head of a movement that had already become unrestrainable. He waslike a horse running downhill harnessed to a heavy cart. Whether he waspulling it or being pushed by it he did not know, but rushed along atheadlong speed with no time to consider what this movement might leadto. Weyrother had been twice that evening to the enemy's picket line toreconnoiter personally, and twice to the Emperors, Russian and Austrian,to report and explain, and to his headquarters where he had dictated thedispositions in German, and now, much exhausted, he arrived atKutuzov's.He was evidently so busy that he even forgot to be polite to thecommander in chief. He interrupted him, talked rapidly and indistinctly,without looking at the man he was addressing, and did not reply toquestions put to him. He was bespattered with mud and had a pitiful,weary, and distracted air, though at the same time he was haughty andself-confident.Kutuzov was occupying a nobleman's castle of modest dimensions nearOstralitz. In the large drawing room which had become the commander inchief's office were gathered Kutuzov himself, Weyrother, and the membersof the council of war. They were drinking tea, and only awaited PrinceBagration to begin the council. At last Bagration's orderly came withthe news that the prince could not attend. Prince Andrew came in toinform the commander-in-chief of this and, availing himself ofpermission previously given him by Kutuzov to be present at the council,he remained in the room."Since Prince Bagration is not coming, we may begin," said Weyrother,hurriedly rising from his seat and going up to the table on which anenormous map of the environs of Brunn was spread out.Kutuzov, with his uniform unbuttoned so that his fat neck bulged overhis collar as if escaping, was sitting almost asleep in a low chair,with his podgy old hands resting symmetrically on its arms. At the soundof Weyrother's voice, he opened his one eye with an effort."Yes, yes, if you please! It is already late," said he, and nodding hishead he let it droop and again closed his eye.If at first the members of the council thought that Kutuzov waspretending to sleep, the sounds his nose emitted during the reading thatfollowed proved that the commander-in-chief at that moment was absorbedby a far more serious matter than a desire to show his contempt for thedispositions or anything else--he was engaged in satisfying theirresistible human need for sleep. He really was asleep. Weyrother, withthe gesture of a man too busy to lose a moment, glanced at Kutuzov and,having convinced himself that he was asleep, took up a paper and in aloud, monotonous voice began to read out the dispositions for theimpending battle, under a heading which he also read out:"Dispositions for an attack on the enemy position behind Kobelnitz andSokolnitz, November 30, 1805."The dispositions were very complicated and difficult. They began asfollows:"As the enemy's left wing rests on wooded hills and his right extendsalong Kobelnitz and Sokolnitz behind the ponds that are there, while we,on the other hand, with our left wing by far outflank his right, it isadvantageous to attack the enemy's latter wing especially if we occupythe villages of Sokolnitz and Kobelnitz, whereby we can both fall on hisflank and pursue him over the plain between Schlappanitz and theThuerassa forest, avoiding the defiles of Schlappanitz and Bellowitzwhich cover the enemy's front. For this object it is necessary that...The first column marches... The second column marches... The thirdcolumn marches..." and so on, read Weyrother.The generals seemed to listen reluctantly to the difficult dispositions.The tall, fair-haired General Buxhowden stood, leaning his back againstthe wall, his eyes fixed on a burning candle, and seemed not to listenor even to wish to be thought to listen. Exactly opposite Weyrother,with his glistening wide-open eyes fixed upon him and his mustachetwisted upwards, sat the ruddy Miloradovich in a military pose, hiselbows turned outwards, his hands on his knees, and his shouldersraised. He remained stubbornly silent, gazing at Weyrother's face, andonly turned away his eyes when the Austrian chief of staff finishedreading. Then Miloradovich looked round significantly at the othergenerals. But one could not tell from that significant look whether heagreed or disagreed and was satisfied or not with the arrangements. Nextto Weyrother sat Count Langeron who, with a subtle smile that never lefthis typically southern French face during the whole time of the reading,gazed at his delicate fingers which rapidly twirled by its corners agold snuffbox on which was a portrait. In the middle of one of thelongest sentences, he stopped the rotary motion of the snuffbox, raisedhis head, and with inimical politeness lurking in the corners of histhin lips interrupted Weyrother, wishing to say something. But theAustrian general, continuing to read, frowned angrily and jerked hiselbows, as if to say: "You can tell me your views later, but now be sogood as to look at the map and listen." Langeron lifted his eyes with anexpression of perplexity, turned round to Miloradovich as if seeking anexplanation, but meeting the latter's impressive but meaningless gazedrooped his eyes sadly and again took to twirling his snuffbox."A geography lesson!" he muttered as if to himself, but loud enough tobe heard.Przebyszewski, with respectful but dignified politeness, held his handto his ear toward Weyrother, with the air of a man absorbed inattention. Dohkturov, a little man, sat opposite Weyrother, with anassiduous and modest mien, and stooping over the outspread mapconscientiously studied the dispositions and the unfamiliar locality. Heasked Weyrother several times to repeat words he had not clearly heardand the difficult names of villages. Weyrother complied and Dohkturovnoted them down.When the reading which lasted more than an hour was over, Langeron againbrought his snuffbox to rest and, without looking at Weyrother or atanyone in particular, began to say how difficult it was to carry outsuch a plan in which the enemy's position was assumed to be known,whereas it was perhaps not known, since the enemy was in movement.Langeron's objections were valid but it was obvious that their chief aimwas to show General Weyrother--who had read his dispositions with asmuch self-confidence as if he were addressing school children--that hehad to do, not with fools, but with men who could teach him something inmilitary matters.When the monotonous sound of Weyrother's voice ceased, Kutuzov openedhis eye as a miller wakes up when the soporific drone of the mill wheelis interrupted. He listened to what Langeron said, as if remarking, "Soyou are still at that silly business!" quickly closed his eye again, andlet his head sink still lower.Langeron, trying as virulently as possible to sting Weyrother's vanityas author of the military plan, argued that Bonaparte might easilyattack instead of being attacked, and so render the whole of this planperfectly worthless. Weyrother met all objections with a firm andcontemptuous smile, evidently prepared beforehand to meet all objectionsbe they what they might."If he could attack us, he would have done so today," said he."So you think he is powerless?" said Langeron."He has forty thousand men at most," replied Weyrother, with the smileof a doctor to whom an old wife wishes to explain the treatment of acase."In that case he is inviting his doom by awaiting our attack," saidLangeron, with a subtly ironical smile, again glancing round for supportto Miloradovich who was near him.But Miloradovich was at that moment evidently thinking of anythingrather than of what the generals were disputing about."Ma foi!" said he, "tomorrow we shall see all that on the battlefield."Weyrother again gave that smile which seemed to say that to him it wasstrange and ridiculous to meet objections from Russian generals and tohave to prove to them what he had not merely convinced himself of, buthad also convinced the sovereign Emperors of."The enemy has quenched his fires and a continual noise is heard fromhis camp," said he. "What does that mean? Either he is retreating, whichis the only thing we need fear, or he is changing his position." (Hesmiled ironically.) "But even if he also took up a position in theThuerassa, he merely saves us a great deal of trouble and all ourarrangements to the minutest detail remain the same.""How is that?..." began Prince Andrew, who had for long been waiting anopportunity to express his doubts.Kutuzov here woke up, coughed heavily, and looked round at the generals."Gentlemen, the dispositions for tomorrow--or rather for today, for itis past midnight--cannot now be altered," said he. "You have heard them,and we shall all do our duty. But before a battle, there is nothing moreimportant..." he paused, "than to have a good sleep."He moved as if to rise. The generals bowed and retired. It was pastmidnight. Prince Andrew went out.The council of war, at which Prince Andrew had not been able to expresshis opinion as he had hoped to, left on him a vague and uneasyimpression. Whether Dolgorukov and Weyrother, or Kutuzov, Langeron, andthe others who did not approve of the plan of attack, were right--he didnot know. "But was it really not possible for Kutuzov to state his viewsplainly to the Emperor? Is it possible that on account of court andpersonal considerations tens of thousands of lives, and my life, mylife," he thought, "must be risked?""Yes, it is very likely that I shall be killed tomorrow," he thought.And suddenly, at this thought of death, a whole series of most distant,most intimate, memories rose in his imagination: he remembered his lastparting from his father and his wife; he remembered the days when hefirst loved her. He thought of her pregnancy and felt sorry for her andfor himself, and in a nervously emotional and softened mood he went outof the hut in which he was billeted with Nesvitski and began to walk upand down before it.The night was foggy and through the fog the moonlight gleamedmysteriously. "Yes, tomorrow, tomorrow!" he thought. "Tomorroweverything may be over for me! All these memories will be no more, noneof them will have any meaning for me. Tomorrow perhaps, even certainly,I have a presentiment that for the first time I shall have to show all Ican do." And his fancy pictured the battle, its loss, the concentrationof fighting at one point, and the hesitation of all the commanders. Andthen that happy moment, that Toulon for which he had so long waited,presents itself to him at last. He firmly and clearly expresses hisopinion to Kutuzov, to Weyrother, and to the Emperors. All are struck bythe justness of his views, but no one undertakes to carry them out, sohe takes a regiment, a division-stipulates that no one is to interferewith his arrangements--leads his division to the decisive point, andgains the victory alone. "But death and suffering?" suggested anothervoice. Prince Andrew, however, did not answer that voice and went ondreaming of his triumphs. The dispositions for the next battle areplanned by him alone. Nominally he is only an adjutant on Kutuzov'sstaff, but he does everything alone. The next battle is won by himalone. Kutuzov is removed and he is appointed... "Well and then?" askedthe other voice. "If before that you are not ten times wounded, killed,or betrayed, well... what then?..." "Well then," Prince Andrew answeredhimself, "I don't know what will happen and don't want to know, andcan't, but if I want this--want glory, want to be known to men, want tobe loved by them, it is not my fault that I want it and want nothing butthat and live only for that. Yes, for that alone! I shall never tellanyone, but, oh God! what am I to do if I love nothing but fame andmen's esteem? Death, wounds, the loss of family--I fear nothing. Andprecious and dear as many persons are to me--father, sister, wife--thosedearest to me--yet dreadful and unnatural as it seems, I would give themall at once for a moment of glory, of triumph over men, of love from menI don't know and never shall know, for the love of these men here," hethought, as he listened to voices in Kutuzov's courtyard. The voiceswere those of the orderlies who were packing up; one voice, probably acoachman's, was teasing Kutuzov's old cook whom Prince Andrew knew, andwho was called Tit. He was saying, "Tit, I say, Tit!""Well?" returned the old man."Go, Tit, thresh a bit!" said the wag."Oh, go to the devil!" called out a voice, drowned by the laughter ofthe orderlies and servants."All the same, I love and value nothing but triumph over them all, Ivalue this mystic power and glory that is floating here above me in thismist!"CHAPTER XIIIThat same night, Rostov was with a platoon on skirmishing duty in frontof Bagration's detachment. His hussars were placed along the line incouples and he himself rode along the line trying to master thesleepiness that kept coming over him. An enormous space, with our army'scampfires dimly glowing in the fog, could be seen behind him; in frontof him was misty darkness. Rostov could see nothing, peer as he wouldinto that foggy distance: now something gleamed gray, now there wassomething black, now little lights seemed to glimmer where the enemyought to be, now he fancied it was only something in his own eyes. Hiseyes kept closing, and in his fancy appeared--now the Emperor, nowDenisov, and now Moscow memories--and he again hurriedly opened his eyesand saw close before him the head and ears of the horse he was riding,and sometimes, when he came within six paces of them, the black figuresof hussars, but in the distance was still the same misty darkness. "Whynot?... It might easily happen," thought Rostov, "that the Emperor willmeet me and give me an order as he would to any other officer; he'llsay: 'Go and find out what's there.' There are many stories of hisgetting to know an officer in just such a chance way and attaching himto himself! What if he gave me a place near him? Oh, how I would guardhim, how I would tell him the truth, how I would unmask his deceivers!"And in order to realize vividly his love devotion to the sovereign,Rostov pictured to himself an enemy or a deceitful German, whom he wouldnot only kill with pleasure but whom he would slap in the face beforethe Emperor. Suddenly a distant shout aroused him. He started and openedhis eyes."Where am I? Oh yes, in the skirmishing line... pass and watchword--shaft, Olmutz. What a nuisance that our squadron will be in reservetomorrow," he thought. "I'll ask leave to go to the front, this may bemy only chance of seeing the Emperor. It won't be long now before I amoff duty. I'll take another turn and when I get back I'll go to thegeneral and ask him." He readjusted himself in the saddle and touched uphis horse to ride once more round his hussars. It seemed to him that itwas getting lighter. To the left he saw a sloping descent lit up, andfacing it a black knoll that seemed as steep as a wall. On this knollthere was a white patch that Rostov could not at all make out: was it aglade in the wood lit up by the moon, or some unmelted snow, or somewhite houses? He even thought something moved on that white spot. "Iexpect it's snow... that spot... a spot--une tache," he thought. "Therenow... it's not a tache... Natasha... sister, black eyes... Na...tasha... (Won't she be surprised when I tell her how I've seen theEmperor?) Natasha... take my sabretache..."--"Keep to the right, yourhonor, there are bushes here," came the voice of an hussar, past whomRostov was riding in the act of falling asleep. Rostov lifted his headthat had sunk almost to his horse's mane and pulled up beside thehussar. He was succumbing to irresistible, youthful, childishdrowsiness. "But what was I thinking? I mustn't forget. How shall Ispeak to the Emperor? No, that's not it--that's tomorrow. Oh yes!Natasha... sabretache... saber them... Whom? The hussars... Ah, thehussars with mustaches. Along the Tverskaya Street rode the hussar withmustaches... I thought about him too, just opposite Guryev's house...Old Guryev.... Oh, but Denisov's a fine fellow. But that's all nonsense.The chief thing is that the Emperor is here. How he looked at me andwished to say something, but dared not.... No, it was I who dared not.But that's nonsense, the chief thing is not to forget the importantthing I was thinking of. Yes, Na-tasha, sabretache, oh, yes, yes! That'sright!" And his head once more sank to his horse's neck. All at once itseemed to him that he was being fired at. "What? What? What?... Cut themdown! What?..." said Rostov, waking up. At the moment he opened his eyeshe heard in front of him, where the enemy was, the long-drawn shouts ofthousands of voices. His horse and the horse of the hussar near himpricked their ears at these shouts. Over there, where the shouting camefrom, a fire flared up and went out again, then another, and all alongthe French line on the hill fires flared up and the shouting grew louderand louder. Rostov could hear the sound of French words but could notdistinguish them. The din of many voices was too great; all he couldhear was: "ahahah!" and "rrrr!""What's that? What do you make of it?" said Rostov to the hussar besidehim. "That must be the enemy's camp!"The hussar did not reply."Why, don't you hear it?" Rostov asked again, after waiting for a reply."Who can tell, your honor?" replied the hussar reluctantly."From the direction, it must be the enemy," repeated Rostov."It may be he or it may be nothing," muttered the hussar. "It's dark...Steady!" he cried to his fidgeting horse.Rostov's horse was also getting restive: it pawed the frozen ground,pricking its ears at the noise and looking at the lights. The shoutinggrew still louder and merged into a general roar that only an army ofseveral thousand men could produce. The lights spread farther andfarther, probably along the line of the French camp. Rostov no longerwanted to sleep. The gay triumphant shouting of the enemy army had astimulating effect on him. "Vive l'Empereur! L'Empereur!" he now hearddistinctly."They can't be far off, probably just beyond the stream," he said to thehussar beside him.The hussar only sighed without replying and coughed angrily. The soundof horse's hoofs approaching at a trot along the line of hussars washeard, and out of the foggy darkness the figure of a sergeant of hussarssuddenly appeared, looming huge as an elephant."Your honor, the generals!" said the sergeant, riding up to Rostov.Rostov, still looking round toward the fires and the shouts, rode withthe sergeant to meet some mounted men who were riding along the line.One was on a white horse. Prince Bagration and Prince Dolgorukov withtheir adjutants had come to witness the curious phenomenon of the lightsand shouts in the enemy's camp. Rostov rode up to Bagration, reported tohim, and then joined the adjutants listening to what the generals weresaying."Believe me," said Prince Dolgorukov, addressing Bagration, "it isnothing but a trick! He has retreated and ordered the rearguard tokindle fires and make a noise to deceive us.""Hardly," said Bagration. "I saw them this evening on that knoll; ifthey had retreated they would have withdrawn from that too.... Officer!"said Bagration to Rostov, "are the enemy's skirmishers still there?""They were there this evening, but now I don't know, your excellency.Shall I go with some of my hussars to see?" replied Rostov.Bagration stopped and, before replying, tried to see Rostov's face inthe mist."Well, go and see," he said, after a pause."Yes, sir."Rostov spurred his horse, called to Sergeant Fedchenko and two otherhussars, told them to follow him, and trotted downhill in the directionfrom which the shouting came. He felt both frightened and pleased to beriding alone with three hussars into that mysterious and dangerous mistydistance where no one had been before him. Bagration called to him fromthe hill not to go beyond the stream, but Rostov pretended not to hearhim and did not stop but rode on and on, continually mistaking bushesfor trees and gullies for men and continually discovering his mistakes.Having descended the hill at a trot, he no longer saw either our own orthe enemy's fires, but heard the shouting of the French more loudly anddistinctly. In the valley he saw before him something like a river, butwhen he reached it he found it was a road. Having come out onto the roadhe reined in his horse, hesitating whether to ride along it or cross itand ride over the black field up the hillside. To keep to the road whichgleamed white in the mist would have been safer because it would beeasier to see people coming along it. "Follow me!" said he, crossed theroad, and began riding up the hill at a gallop toward the point wherethe French pickets had been standing that evening."Your honor, there he is!" cried one of the hussars behind him. Andbefore Rostov had time to make out what the black thing was that hadsuddenly appeared in the fog, there was a flash, followed by a report,and a bullet whizzing high up in the mist with a plaintive sound passedout of hearing. Another musket missed fire but flashed in the pan.Rostov turned his horse and galloped back. Four more reports followed atintervals, and the bullets passed somewhere in the fog singing indifferent tones. Rostov reined in his horse, whose spirits had risen,like his own, at the firing, and went back at a footpace. "Well, somemore! Some more!" a merry voice was saying in his soul. But no moreshots came.Only when approaching Bagration did Rostov let his horse gallop again,and with his hand at the salute rode up to the general.Dolgorukov was still insisting that the French had retreated and hadonly lit fires to deceive us."What does that prove?" he was saying as Rostov rode up. "They mightretreat and leave the pickets.""It's plain that they have not all gone yet, Prince," said Bagration."Wait till tomorrow morning, we'll find out everything tomorrow.""The picket is still on the hill, your excellency, just where it was inthe evening," reported Rostov, stooping forward with his hand at thesalute and unable to repress the smile of delight induced by his rideand especially by the sound of the bullets."Very good, very good," said Bagration. "Thank you, officer.""Your excellency," said Rostov, "may I ask a favor?""What is it?""Tomorrow our squadron is to be in reserve. May I ask to be attached tothe first squadron?""What's your name?""Count Rostov.""Oh, very well, you may stay in attendance on me.""Count Ilya Rostov's son?" asked Dolgorukov.But Rostov did not reply."Then I may reckon on it, your excellency?""I will give the order.""Tomorrow very likely I may be sent with some message to the Emperor,"thought Rostov."Thank God!"The fires and shouting in the enemy's army were occasioned by the factthat while Napoleon's proclamation was being read to the troops theEmperor himself rode round his bivouacs. The soldiers, on seeing him,lit wisps of straw and ran after him, shouting, "Vive l'Empereur!"Napoleon's proclamation was as follows:Soldiers! The Russian army is advancing against you to avenge theAustrian army of Ulm. They are the same battalions you broke atHollabrunn and have pursued ever since to this place. The position weoccupy is a strong one, and while they are marching to go round me onthe right they will expose a flank to me. Soldiers! I will myself directyour battalions. I will keep out of fire if you with your habitual valorcarry disorder and confusion into the enemy's ranks, but should victorybe in doubt, even for a moment, you will see your Emperor exposinghimself to the first blows of the enemy, for there must be no doubt ofvictory, especially on this day when what is at stake is the honor ofthe French infantry, so necessary to the honor of our nation.Do not break your ranks on the plea of removing the wounded! Let everyman be fully imbued with the thought that we must defeat these hirelingsof England, inspired by such hatred of our nation! This victory willconclude our campaign and we can return to winter quarters, where freshFrench troops who are being raised in France will join us, and the peaceI shall conclude will be worthy of my people, of you, and of myself.NAPOLEONCHAPTER XIVAt five in the morning it was still quite dark. The troops of thecenter, the reserves, and Bagration's right flank had not yet moved, buton the left flank the columns of infantry, cavalry, and artillery, whichwere to be the first to descend the heights to attack the French rightflank and drive it into the Bohemian mountains according to plan, werealready up and astir. The smoke of the campfires, into which they werethrowing everything superfluous, made the eyes smart. It was cold anddark. The officers were hurriedly drinking tea and breakfasting, thesoldiers, munching biscuit and beating a tattoo with their feet to warmthemselves, gathering round the fires throwing into the flames theremains of sheds, chairs, tables, wheels, tubs, and everything that theydid not want or could not carry away with them. Austrian column guideswere moving in and out among the Russian troops and served as heralds ofthe advance. As soon as an Austrian officer showed himself near acommanding officer's quarters, the regiment began to move: the soldiersran from the fires, thrust their pipes into their boots, their bags intothe carts, got their muskets ready, and formed rank. The officersbuttoned up their coats, buckled on their swords and pouches, and movedalong the ranks shouting. The train drivers and orderlies harnessed andpacked the wagons and tied on the loads. The adjutants and battalion andregimental commanders mounted, crossed themselves, gave finalinstructions, orders, and commissions to the baggage men who remainedbehind, and the monotonous tramp of thousands of feet resounded. Thecolumn moved forward without knowing where and unable, from the massesaround them, the smoke and the increasing fog, to see either the placethey were leaving or that to which they were going.A soldier on the march is hemmed in and borne along by his regiment asmuch as a sailor is by his ship. However far he has walked, whateverstrange, unknown, and dangerous places he reaches, just as a sailor isalways surrounded by the same decks, masts, and rigging of his ship, sothe soldier always has around him the same comrades, the same ranks, thesame sergeant major Ivan Mitrich, the same company dog Jack, and thesame commanders. The sailor rarely cares to know the latitude in whichhis ship is sailing, but on the day of battle--heaven knows how andwhence--a stern note of which all are conscious sounds in the moralatmosphere of an army, announcing the approach of something decisive andsolemn, and awakening in the men an unusual curiosity. On the day ofbattle the soldiers excitedly try to get beyond the interests of theirregiment, they listen intently, look about, and eagerly ask concerningwhat is going on around them.The fog had grown so dense that though it was growing light they couldnot see ten paces ahead. Bushes looked like gigantic trees and levelground like cliffs and slopes. Anywhere, on any side, one mightencounter an enemy invisible ten paces off. But the columns advanced fora long time, always in the same fog, descending and ascending hills,avoiding gardens and enclosures, going over new and unknown ground, andnowhere encountering the enemy. On the contrary, the soldiers becameaware that in front, behind, and on all sides, other Russian columnswere moving in the same direction. Every soldier felt glad to know thatto the unknown place where he was going, many more of our men were goingtoo."There now, the Kurskies have also gone past," was being said in theranks."It's wonderful what a lot of our troops have gathered, lads! Last nightI looked at the campfires and there was no end of them. A regularMoscow!"Though none of the column commanders rode up to the ranks or talked tothe men (the commanders, as we saw at the council of war, were out ofhumor and dissatisfied with the affair, and so did not exert themselvesto cheer the men but merely carried out the orders), yet the troopsmarched gaily, as they always do when going into action, especially toan attack. But when they had marched for about an hour in the dense fog,the greater part of the men had to halt and an unpleasant consciousnessof some dislocation and blunder spread through the ranks. How such aconsciousness is communicated is very difficult to define, but itcertainly is communicated very surely, and flows rapidly, imperceptibly,and irrepressibly, as water does in a creek. Had the Russian army beenalone without any allies, it might perhaps have been a long time beforethis consciousness of mismanagement became a general conviction, but asit was, the disorder was readily and naturally attributed to the stupidGermans, and everyone was convinced that a dangerous muddle had beenoccasioned by the sausage eaters."Why have we stopped? Is the way blocked? Or have we already come upagainst the French?""No, one can't hear them. They'd be firing if we had.""They were in a hurry enough to start us, and now here we stand in themiddle of a field without rhyme or reason. It's all those damnedGermans' muddling! What stupid devils!""Yes, I'd send them on in front, but no fear, they're crowding upbehind. And now here we stand hungry.""I say, shall we soon be clear? They say the cavalry are blocking theway," said an officer."Ah, those damned Germans! They don't know their own country!" saidanother."What division are you?" shouted an adjutant, riding up."The Eighteenth.""Then why are you here? You should have gone on long ago, now you won'tget there till evening.""What stupid orders! They don't themselves know what they are doing!"said the officer and rode off.Then a general rode past shouting something angrily, not in Russian."Tafa-lafa! But what he's jabbering no one can make out," said asoldier, mimicking the general who had ridden away. "I'd shoot them, thescoundrels!""We were ordered to be at the place before nine, but we haven't gothalfway. Fine orders!" was being repeated on different sides.And the feeling of energy with which the troops had started began toturn into vexation and anger at the stupid arrangements and at theGermans.The cause of the confusion was that while the Austrian cavalry wasmoving toward our left flank, the higher command found that our centerwas too far separated from our right flank and the cavalry were allordered to turn back to the right. Several thousand cavalry crossed infront of the infantry, who had to wait.At the front an altercation occurred between an Austrian guide and aRussian general. The general shouted a demand that the cavalry should behalted, the Austrian argued that not he, but the higher command, was toblame. The troops meanwhile stood growing listless and dispirited. Afteran hour's delay they at last moved on, descending the hill. The fog thatwas dispersing on the hill lay still more densely below, where they weredescending. In front in the fog a shot was heard and then another, atfirst irregularly at varying intervals--trata... tat--and then more andmore regularly and rapidly, and the action at the Goldbach Stream began.Not expecting to come on the enemy down by the stream, and havingstumbled on him in the fog, hearing no encouraging word from theircommanders, and with a consciousness of being too late spreading throughthe ranks, and above all being unable to see anything in front or aroundthem in the thick fog, the Russians exchanged shots with the enemylazily and advanced and again halted, receiving no timely orders fromthe officers or adjutants who wandered about in the fog in those unknownsurroundings unable to find their own regiments. In this way the actionbegan for the first, second, and third columns, which had gone down intothe valley. The fourth column, with which Kutuzov was, stood on thePratzen Heights.Below, where the fight was beginning, there was still thick fog; on thehigher ground it was clearing, but nothing could be seen of what wasgoing on in front. Whether all the enemy forces were, as we supposed,six miles away, or whether they were near by in that sea of mist, no oneknew till after eight o'clock.It was nine o'clock in the morning. The fog lay unbroken like a sea downbelow, but higher up at the village of Schlappanitz where Napoleon stoodwith his marshals around him, it was quite light. Above him was a clearblue sky, and the sun's vast orb quivered like a huge hollow, crimsonfloat on the surface of that milky sea of mist. The whole French army,and even Napoleon himself with his staff, were not on the far side ofthe streams and hollows of Sokolnitz and Schlappanitz beyond which weintended to take up our position and begin the action, but were on thisside, so close to our own forces that Napoleon with the naked eye coulddistinguish a mounted man from one on foot. Napoleon, in the blue cloakwhich he had worn on his Italian campaign, sat on his small gray Arabhorse a little in front of his marshals. He gazed silently at the hillswhich seemed to rise out of the sea of mist and on which the Russiantroops were moving in the distance, and he listened to the sounds offiring in the valley. Not a single muscle of his face--which in thosedays was still thin--moved. His gleaming eyes were fixed intently on onespot. His predictions were being justified. Part of the Russian forcehad already descended into the valley toward the ponds and lakes andpart were leaving these Pratzen Heights which he intended to attack andregarded as the key to the position. He saw over the mist that in ahollow between two hills near the village of Pratzen, the Russiancolumns, their bayonets glittering, were moving continuously in onedirection toward the valley and disappearing one after another into themist. From information he had received the evening before, from thesound of wheels and footsteps heard by the outposts during the night, bythe disorderly movement of the Russian columns, and from allindications, he saw clearly that the allies believed him to be far awayin front of them, and that the columns moving near Pratzen constitutedthe center of the Russian army, and that that center was alreadysufficiently weakened to be successfully attacked. But still he did notbegin the engagement.Today was a great day for him--the anniversary of his coronation. Beforedawn he had slept for a few hours, and refreshed, vigorous, and in goodspirits, he mounted his horse and rode out into the field in that happymood in which everything seems possible and everything succeeds. He satmotionless, looking at the heights visible above the mist, and his coldface wore that special look of confident, self-complacent happiness thatone sees on the face of a boy happily in love. The marshals stood behindhim not venturing to distract his attention. He looked now at thePratzen Heights, now at the sun floating up out of the mist.When the sun had entirely emerged from the fog, and fields and mist wereaglow with dazzling light--as if he had only awaited this to begin theaction--he drew the glove from his shapely white hand, made a sign withit to the marshals, and ordered the action to begin. The marshals,accompanied by adjutants, galloped off in different directions, and afew minutes later the chief forces of the French army moved rapidlytoward those Pratzen Heights which were being more and more denuded byRussian troops moving down the valley to their left.CHAPTER XVAt eight o'clock Kutuzov rode to Pratzen at the head of the fourthcolumn, Miloradovich's, the one that was to take the place ofPrzebyszewski's and Langeron's columns which had already gone down intothe valley. He greeted the men of the foremost regiment and gave themthe order to march, thereby indicating that he intended to lead thatcolumn himself. When he had reached the village of Pratzen he halted.Prince Andrew was behind, among the immense number forming thecommander-in-chief's suite. He was in a state of suppressed excitementand irritation, though controlledly calm as a man is at the approach ofa long-awaited moment. He was firmly convinced that this was the day ofhis Toulon, or his bridge of Arcola. How it would come about he did notknow, but he felt sure it would do so. The locality and the position ofour troops were known to him as far as they could be known to anyone inour army. His own strategic plan, which obviously could not now becarried out, was forgotten. Now, entering into Weyrother's plan, PrinceAndrew considered possible contingencies and formed new projects such asmight call for his rapidity of perception and decision.To the left down below in the mist, the musketry fire of unseen forcescould be heard. It was there Prince Andrew thought the fight wouldconcentrate. "There we shall encounter difficulties, and there," thoughthe, "I shall be sent with a brigade or division, and there, standard inhand, I shall go forward and break whatever is in front of me."He could not look calmly at the standards of the passing battalions.Seeing them he kept thinking, "That may be the very standard with whichI shall lead the army."In the morning all that was left of the night mist on the heights was ahoar frost now turning to dew, but in the valleys it still lay like amilk-white sea. Nothing was visible in the valley to the left into whichour troops had descended and from whence came the sounds of firing.Above the heights was the dark clear sky, and to the right the vast orbof the sun. In front, far off on the farther shore of that sea of mist,some wooded hills were discernible, and it was there the enemy probablywas, for something could be descried. On the right the Guards wereentering the misty region with a sound of hoofs and wheels and now andthen a gleam of bayonets; to the left beyond the village similar massesof cavalry came up and disappeared in the sea of mist. In front andbehind moved infantry. The commander-in-chief was standing at the end ofthe village letting the troops pass by him. That morning Kutuzov seemedworn and irritable. The infantry passing before him came to a haltwithout any command being given, apparently obstructed by something infront."Do order them to form into battalion columns and go round the village!"he said angrily to a general who had ridden up. "Don't you understand,your excellency, my dear sir, that you must not defile through narrowvillage streets when we are marching against the enemy?""I intended to re-form them beyond the village, your excellency,"answered the general.Kutuzov laughed bitterly."You'll make a fine thing of it, deploying in sight of the enemy! Veryfine!""The enemy is still far away, your excellency. According to thedispositions...""The dispositions!" exclaimed Kutuzov bitterly. "Who told you that?...Kindly do as you are ordered.""Yes, sir.""My dear fellow," Nesvitski whispered to Prince Andrew, "the old man isas surly as a dog."An Austrian officer in a white uniform with green plumes in his hatgalloped up to Kutuzov and asked in the Emperor's name had the fourthcolumn advanced into action.Kutuzov turned round without answering and his eye happened to fall uponPrince Andrew, who was beside him. Seeing him, Kutuzov's malevolent andcaustic expression softened, as if admitting that what was being donewas not his adjutant's fault, and still not answering the Austrianadjutant, he addressed Bolkonski."Go, my dear fellow, and see whether the third division has passed thevillage. Tell it to stop and await my orders."Hardly had Prince Andrew started than he stopped him."And ask whether sharpshooters have been posted," he added. "What arethey doing? What are they doing?" he murmured to himself, still notreplying to the Austrian.Prince Andrew galloped off to execute the order.Overtaking the battalions that continued to advance, he stopped thethird division and convinced himself that there really were nosharpshooters in front of our columns. The colonel at the head of theregiment was much surprised at the commander-in-chief's order to throwout skirmishers. He had felt perfectly sure that there were other troopsin front of him and that the enemy must be at least six miles away.There was really nothing to be seen in front except a barren descenthidden by dense mist. Having given orders in the commander-in-chief'sname to rectify this omission, Prince Andrew galloped back. Kutuzovstill in the same place, his stout body resting heavily in the saddlewith the lassitude of age, sat yawning wearily with closed eyes. Thetroops were no longer moving, but stood with the butts of their musketson the ground."All right, all right!" he said to Prince Andrew, and turned to ageneral who, watch in hand, was saying it was time they started as allthe left-flank columns had already descended."Plenty of time, your excellency," muttered Kutuzov in the midst of ayawn. "Plenty of time," he repeated.Just then at a distance behind Kutuzov was heard the sound of regimentssaluting, and this sound rapidly came nearer along the whole extendedline of the advancing Russian columns. Evidently the person they weregreeting was riding quickly. When the soldiers of the regiment in frontof which Kutuzov was standing began to shout, he rode a little to oneside and looked round with a frown. Along the road from Pratzen gallopedwhat looked like a squadron of horsemen in various uniforms. Two of themrode side by side in front, at full gallop. One in a black uniform withwhite plumes in his hat rode a bobtailed chestnut horse, the other whowas in a white uniform rode a black one. These were the two Emperorsfollowed by their suites. Kutuzov, affecting the manners of an oldsoldier at the front, gave the command "Attention!" and rode up to theEmperors with a salute. His whole appearance and manner were suddenlytransformed. He put on the air of a subordinate who obeys withoutreasoning. With an affectation of respect which evidently struckAlexander unpleasantly, he rode up and saluted.This unpleasant impression merely flitted over the young and happy faceof the Emperor like a cloud of haze across a clear sky and vanished.After his illness he looked rather thinner that day than on the field ofOlmutz where Bolkonski had seen him for the first time abroad, but therewas still the same bewitching combination of majesty and mildness in hisfine gray eyes, and on his delicate lips the same capacity for varyingexpression and the same prevalent appearance of goodhearted innocentyouth.At the Olmutz review he had seemed more majestic; here he seemedbrighter and more energetic. He was slightly flushed after galloping twomiles, and reining in his horse he sighed restfully and looked round atthe faces of his suite, young and animated as his own. Czartoryski,Novosiltsev, Prince Volkonsky, Strogonov, and the others, all richlydressed gay young men on splendid, well-groomed, fresh, only slightlyheated horses, exchanging remarks and smiling, had stopped behind theEmperor. The Emperor Francis, a rosy, long faced young man, sat veryerect on his handsome black horse, looking about him in a leisurely andpreoccupied manner. He beckoned to one of his white adjutants and askedsome question--"Most likely he is asking at what o'clock they started,"thought Prince Andrew, watching his old acquaintance with a smile hecould not repress as he recalled his reception at Brunn. In theEmperors' suite were the picked young orderly officers of the Guard andline regiments, Russian and Austrian. Among them were grooms leading theTsar's beautiful relay horses covered with embroidered cloths.As when a window is opened a whiff of fresh air from the fields enters astuffy room, so a whiff of youthfulness, energy, and confidence ofsuccess reached Kutuzov's cheerless staff with the galloping advent ofall these brilliant young men."Why aren't you beginning, Michael Ilarionovich?" said the EmperorAlexander hurriedly to Kutuzov, glancing courteously at the same time atthe Emperor Francis."I am waiting, Your Majesty," answered Kutuzov, bending forwardrespectfully.The Emperor, frowning slightly, bent his ear forward as if he had notquite heard."Waiting, Your Majesty," repeated Kutuzov. (Prince Andrew noted thatKutuzov's upper lip twitched unnaturally as he said the word "waiting.")"Not all the columns have formed up yet, Your Majesty."The Tsar heard but obviously did not like the reply; he shrugged hisrather round shoulders and glanced at Novosiltsev who was near him, asif complaining of Kutuzov."You know, Michael Ilarionovich, we are not on the Empress' Field wherea parade does not begin till all the troops are assembled," said theTsar with another glance at the Emperor Francis, as if inviting him ifnot to join in at least to listen to what he was saying. But the EmperorFrancis continued to look about him and did not listen."That is just why I do not begin, sire," said Kutuzov in a resoundingvoice, apparently to preclude the possibility of not being heard, andagain something in his face twitched--"That is just why I do not begin,sire, because we are not on parade and not on the Empress' Field," saidclearly and distinctly.In the Emperor's suite all exchanged rapid looks that expresseddissatisfaction and reproach. "Old though he may be, he should not, hecertainly should not, speak like that," their glances seemed to say.The Tsar looked intently and observantly into Kutuzov's eye waiting tohear whether he would say anything more. But Kutuzov, with respectfullybowed head, seemed also to be waiting. The silence lasted for about aminute."However, if you command it, Your Majesty," said Kutuzov, lifting hishead and again assuming his former tone of a dull, unreasoning, butsubmissive general.He touched his horse and having called Miloradovich, the commander ofthe column, gave him the order to advance.The troops again began to move, and two battalions of the Novgorod andone of the Apsheron regiment went forward past the Emperor.As this Apsheron battalion marched by, the red-faced Miloradovich,without his greatcoat, with his Orders on his breast and an enormoustuft of plumes in his cocked hat worn on one side with its corners frontand back, galloped strenuously forward, and with a dashing salute reinedin his horse before the Emperor."God be with you, general!" said the Emperor."Ma foi, sire, nous ferons ce qui sera dans notre possibilite, sire," *he answered gaily, raising nevertheless ironic smiles among thegentlemen of the Tsar's suite by his poor French.* "Indeed, Sire, we shall do everything it is possible to do, Sire."Miloradovich wheeled his horse sharply and stationed himself a littlebehind the Emperor. The Apsheron men, excited by the Tsar's presence,passed in step before the Emperors and their suites at a bold, briskpace."Lads!" shouted Miloradovich in a loud, self-confident, and cheeryvoice, obviously so elated by the sound of firing, by the prospect ofbattle, and by the sight of the gallant Apsherons, his comrades inSuvorov's time, now passing so gallantly before the Emperors, that heforgot the sovereigns' presence. "Lads, it's not the first villageyou've had to take," cried he."Glad to do our best!" shouted the soldiers.The Emperor's horse started at the sudden cry. This horse that hadcarried the sovereign at reviews in Russia bore him also here on thefield of Austerlitz, enduring the heedless blows of his left foot andpricking its ears at the sound of shots just as it had done on theEmpress' Field, not understanding the significance of the firing, nor ofthe nearness of the Emperor Francis' black cob, nor of all that wasbeing said, thought, and felt that day by its rider.The Emperor turned with a smile to one of his followers and made aremark to him, pointing to the gallant Apsherons.CHAPTER XVIKutuzov accompanied by his adjutants rode at a walking pace behind thecarabineers.When he had gone less than half a mile in the rear of the column hestopped at a solitary, deserted house that had probably once been aninn, where two roads parted. Both of them led downhill and troops weremarching along both.The fog had begun to clear and enemy troops were already dimly visibleabout a mile and a half off on the opposite heights. Down below, on theleft, the firing became more distinct. Kutuzov had stopped and wasspeaking to an Austrian general. Prince Andrew, who was a little behindlooking at them, turned to an adjutant to ask him for a field glass."Look, look!" said this adjutant, looking not at the troops in thedistance, but down the hill before him. "It's the French!"The two generals and the adjutant took hold of the field glass, tryingto snatch it from one another. The expression on all their facessuddenly changed to one of horror. The French were supposed to be a mileand a half away, but had suddenly and unexpectedly appeared just infront of us."It's the enemy?... No!... Yes, see it is!... for certain.... But how isthat?" said different voices.With the naked eye Prince Andrew saw below them to the right, not morethan five hundred paces from where Kutuzov was standing, a dense Frenchcolumn coming up to meet the Apsherons."Here it is! The decisive moment has arrived. My turn has come," thoughtPrince Andrew, and striking his horse he rode up to Kutuzov."The Apsherons must be stopped, your excellency," cried he. But at thatvery instant a cloud of smoke spread all round, firing was heard quiteclose at hand, and a voice of naive terror barely two steps from PrinceAndrew shouted, "Brothers! All's lost!" And at this as if at a command,everyone began to run.Confused and ever-increasing crowds were running back to where fiveminutes before the troops had passed the Emperors. Not only would ithave been difficult to stop that crowd, it was even impossible not to becarried back with it oneself. Bolkonski only tried not to lose touchwith it, and looked around bewildered and unable to grasp what washappening in front of him. Nesvitski with an angry face, red and unlikehimself, was shouting to Kutuzov that if he did not ride away at once hewould certainly be taken prisoner. Kutuzov remained in the same placeand without answering drew out a handkerchief. Blood was flowing fromhis cheek. Prince Andrew forced his way to him."You are wounded?" he asked, hardly able to master the trembling of hislower jaw."The wound is not here, it is there!" said Kutuzov, pressing thehandkerchief to his wounded cheek and pointing to the fleeing soldiers."Stop them!" he shouted, and at the same moment, probably realizing thatit was impossible to stop them, spurred his horse and rode to the right.A fresh wave of the flying mob caught him and bore him back with it.The troops were running in such a dense mass that once surrounded bythem it was difficult to get out again. One was shouting, "Get on! Whyare you hindering us?" Another in the same place turned round and firedin the air; a third was striking the horse Kutuzov himself rode. Havingby a great effort got away to the left from that flood of men, Kutuzov,with his suite diminished by more than half, rode toward a sound ofartillery fire near by. Having forced his way out of the crowd offugitives, Prince Andrew, trying to keep near Kutuzov, saw on the slopeof the hill amid the smoke a Russian battery that was still firing andFrenchmen running toward it. Higher up stood some Russian infantry,neither moving forward to protect the battery nor backward with thefleeing crowd. A mounted general separated himself from the infantry andapproached Kutuzov. Of Kutuzov's suite only four remained. They were allpale and exchanged looks in silence."Stop those wretches!" gasped Kutuzov to the regimental commander,pointing to the flying soldiers; but at that instant, as if to punishhim for those words, bullets flew hissing across the regiment and acrossKutuzov's suite like a flock of little birds.The French had attacked the battery and, seeing Kutuzov, were firing athim. After this volley the regimental commander clutched at his leg;several soldiers fell, and a second lieutenant who was holding the flaglet it fall from his hands. It swayed and fell, but caught on themuskets of the nearest soldiers. The soldiers started firing withoutorders."Oh! Oh! Oh!" groaned Kutuzov despairingly and looked around...."Bolkonski!" he whispered, his voice trembling from a consciousness ofthe feebleness of age, "Bolkonski!" he whispered, pointing to thedisordered battalion and at the enemy, "what's that?"But before he had finished speaking, Prince Andrew, feeling tears ofshame and anger choking him, had already leapt from his horse and run tothe standard."Forward, lads!" he shouted in a voice piercing as a child's."Here it is!" thought he, seizing the staff of the standard and hearingwith pleasure the whistle of bullets evidently aimed at him. Severalsoldiers fell."Hurrah!" shouted Prince Andrew, and, scarcely able to hold up the heavystandard, he ran forward with full confidence that the whole battalionwould follow him.And really he only ran a few steps alone. One soldier moved and thenanother and soon the whole battalion ran forward shouting "Hurrah!" andovertook him. A sergeant of the battalion ran up and took the flag thatwas swaying from its weight in Prince Andrew's hands, but he wasimmediately killed. Prince Andrew again seized the standard and,dragging it by the staff, ran on with the battalion. In front he saw ourartillerymen, some of whom were fighting, while others, having abandonedtheir guns, were running toward him. He also saw French infantrysoldiers who were seizing the artillery horses and turning the gunsround. Prince Andrew and the battalion were already within twenty pacesof the cannon. He heard the whistle of bullets above him unceasingly andto right and left of him soldiers continually groaned and dropped. Buthe did not look at them: he looked only at what was going on in front ofhim--at the battery. He now saw clearly the figure of a red-hairedgunner with his shako knocked awry, pulling one end of a mop while aFrench soldier tugged at the other. He could distinctly see thedistraught yet angry expression on the faces of these two men, whoevidently did not realize what they were doing."What are they about?" thought Prince Andrew as he gazed at them. "Whydoesn't the red-haired gunner run away as he is unarmed? Why doesn't theFrenchman stab him? He will not get away before the Frenchman remembershis bayonet and stabs him...."And really another French soldier, trailing his musket, ran up to thestruggling men, and the fate of the red-haired gunner, who hadtriumphantly secured the mop and still did not realize what awaited him,was about to be decided. But Prince Andrew did not see how it ended. Itseemed to him as though one of the soldiers near him hit him on the headwith the full swing of a bludgeon. It hurt a little, but the worst of itwas that the pain distracted him and prevented his seeing what he hadbeen looking at."What's this? Am I falling? My legs are giving way," thought he, andfell on his back. He opened his eyes, hoping to see how the struggle ofthe Frenchmen with the gunners ended, whether the red-haired gunner hadbeen killed or not and whether the cannon had been captured or saved.But he saw nothing. Above him there was now nothing but the sky--thelofty sky, not clear yet still immeasurably lofty, with gray cloudsgliding slowly across it. "How quiet, peaceful, and solemn; not at allas I ran," thought Prince Andrew--"not as we ran, shouting and fighting,not at all as the gunner and the Frenchman with frightened and angryfaces struggled for the mop: how differently do those clouds glideacross that lofty infinite sky! How was it I did not see that lofty skybefore? And how happy I am to have found it at last! Yes! All is vanity,all falsehood, except that infinite sky. There is nothing, nothing, butthat. But even it does not exist, there is nothing but quiet and peace.Thank God!..."CHAPTER XVIIOn our right flank commanded by Bagration, at nine o'clock the battlehad not yet begun. Not wishing to agree to Dolgorukov's demand tocommence the action, and wishing to avert responsibility from himself,Prince Bagration proposed to Dolgorukov to send to inquire of thecommander-in-chief. Bagration knew that as the distance between the twoflanks was more than six miles, even if the messenger were not killed(which he very likely would be), and found the commander-in-chief (whichwould be very difficult), he would not be able to get back beforeevening.Bagration cast his large, expressionless, sleepy eyes round his suite,and the boyish face Rostov, breathless with excitement and hope, was thefirst to catch his eye. He sent him."And if I should meet His Majesty before I meet the commander-in-chief,your excellency?" said Rostov, with his hand to his cap."You can give the message to His Majesty," said Dolgorukov, hurriedlyinterrupting Bagration.On being relieved from picket duty Rostov had managed to get a fewhours' sleep before morning and felt cheerful, bold, and resolute, withelasticity of movement, faith in his good fortune, and generally in thatstate of mind which makes everything seem possible, pleasant, and easy.All his wishes were being fulfilled that morning: there was to be ageneral engagement in which he was taking part, more than that, he wasorderly to the bravest general, and still more, he was going with amessage to Kutuzov, perhaps even to the sovereign himself. The morningwas bright, he had a good horse under him, and his heart was full of joyand happiness. On receiving the order he gave his horse the rein andgalloped along the line. At first he rode along the line of Bagration'stroops, which had not yet advanced into action but were standingmotionless; then he came to the region occupied by Uvarov's cavalry andhere he noticed a stir and signs of preparation for battle; havingpassed Uvarov's cavalry he clearly heard the sound of cannon andmusketry ahead of him. The firing grew louder and louder.In the fresh morning air were now heard, not two or three musket shotsat irregular intervals as before, followed by one or two cannon shots,but a roll of volleys of musketry from the slopes of the hill beforePratzen, interrupted by such frequent reports of cannon that sometimesseveral of them were not separated from one another but merged into ageneral roar.He could see puffs of musketry smoke that seemed to chase one anotherdown the hillsides, and clouds of cannon smoke rolling, spreading, andmingling with one another. He could also, by the gleam of bayonetsvisible through the smoke, make out moving masses of infantry and narrowlines of artillery with green caissons.Rostov stopped his horse for a moment on a hillock to see what was goingon, but strain his attention as he would he could not understand or makeout anything of what was happening: there in the smoke men of some sortwere moving about, in front and behind moved lines of troops; but why,whither, and who they were, it was impossible to make out. These sightsand sounds had no depressing or intimidating effect on him; on thecontrary, they stimulated his energy and determination."Go on! Go on! Give it them!" he mentally exclaimed at these sounds, andagain proceeded to gallop along the line, penetrating farther andfarther into the region where the army was already in action."How it will be there I don't know, but all will be well!" thoughtRostov.After passing some Austrian troops he noticed that the next part of theline (the Guards) was already in action."So much the better! I shall see it close," he thought.He was riding almost along the front line. A handful of men camegalloping toward him. They were our uhlans who with disordered rankswere returning from the attack. Rostov got out of their way,involuntarily noticed that one of them was bleeding, and galloped on."That is no business of mine," he thought. He had not ridden manyhundred yards after that before he saw to his left, across the wholewidth of the field, an enormous mass of cavalry in brilliant whiteuniforms, mounted on black horses, trotting straight toward him andacross his path. Rostov put his horse to full gallop to get out of theway of these men, and he would have got clear had they continued at thesame speed, but they kept increasing their pace, so that some of thehorses were already galloping. Rostov heard the thud of their hoofs andthe jingle of their weapons and saw their horses, their figures, andeven their faces, more and more distinctly. They were our Horse Guards,advancing to attack the French cavalry that was coming to meet them.The Horse Guards were galloping, but still holding in their horses.Rostov could already see their faces and heard the command: "Charge!"shouted by an officer who was urging his thoroughbred to full speed.Rostov, fearing to be crushed or swept into the attack on the French,galloped along the front as hard as his horse could go, but still wasnot in time to avoid them.The last of the Horse Guards, a huge pockmarked fellow, frowned angrilyon seeing Rostov before him, with whom he would inevitably collide. ThisGuardsman would certainly have bowled Rostov and his Bedouin over(Rostov felt himself quite tiny and weak compared to these gigantic menand horses) had it not occurred to Rostov to flourish his whip beforethe eyes of the Guardsman's horse. The heavy black horse, sixteen handshigh, shied, throwing back its ears; but the pockmarked Guardsman drovehis huge spurs in violently, and the horse, flourishing its tail andextending its neck, galloped on yet faster. Hardly had the Horse Guardspassed Rostov before he heard them shout, "Hurrah!" and looking back sawthat their foremost ranks were mixed up with some foreign cavalry withred epaulets, probably French. He could see nothing more, forimmediately afterwards cannon began firing from somewhere and smokeenveloped everything.At that moment, as the Horse Guards, having passed him, disappeared inthe smoke, Rostov hesitated whether to gallop after them or to go wherehe was sent. This was the brilliant charge of the Horse Guards thatamazed the French themselves. Rostov was horrified to hear later that ofall that mass of huge and handsome men, of all those brilliant, richyouths, officers and cadets, who had galloped past him on theirthousand-ruble horses, only eighteen were left after the charge."Why should I envy them? My chance is not lost, and maybe I shall seethe Emperor immediately!" thought Rostov and galloped on.When he came level with the Foot Guards he noticed that about them andaround them cannon balls were flying, of which he was aware not so muchbecause he heard their sound as because he saw uneasiness on thesoldiers' faces and unnatural warlike solemnity on those of theofficers.Passing behind one of the lines of a regiment of Foot Guards he heard avoice calling him by name."Rostov!""What?" he answered, not recognizing Boris."I say, we've been in the front line! Our regiment attacked!" said Boriswith the happy smile seen on the faces of young men who have been underfire for the first time.Rostov stopped."Have you?" he said. "Well, how did it go?""We drove them back!" said Boris with animation, growing talkative. "Canyou imagine it?" and he began describing how the Guards, having taken uptheir position and seeing troops before them, thought they wereAustrians, and all at once discovered from the cannon balls dischargedby those troops that they were themselves in the front line and hadunexpectedly to go into action. Rostov without hearing Boris to the endspurred his horse."Where are you off to?" asked Boris."With a message to His Majesty.""There he is!" said Boris, thinking Rostov had said "His Highness," andpointing to the Grand Duke who with his high shoulders and frowningbrows stood a hundred paces away from them in his helmet and HorseGuards' jacket, shouting something to a pale, white uniformed Austrianofficer."But that's the Grand Duke, and I want the commander-in-chief or theEmperor," said Rostov, and was about to spur his horse."Count! Count!" shouted Berg who ran up from the other side as eager asBoris. "Count! I am wounded in my right hand" (and he showed hisbleeding hand with a handkerchief tied round it) "and I remained at thefront. I held my sword in my left hand, Count. All our family--the vonBergs--have been knights!"He said something more, but Rostov did not wait to hear it and rodeaway.Having passed the Guards and traversed an empty space, Rostov, to avoidagain getting in front of the first line as he had done when the HorseGuards charged, followed the line of reserves, going far round the placewhere the hottest musket fire and cannonade were heard. Suddenly heheard musket fire quite close in front of him and behind our troops,where he could never have expected the enemy to be."What can it be?" he thought. "The enemy in the rear of our army?Impossible!" And suddenly he was seized by a panic of fear for himselfand for the issue of the whole battle. "But be that what it may," hereflected, "there is no riding round it now. I must look for thecommander in chief here, and if all is lost it is for me to perish withthe rest."The foreboding of evil that had suddenly come over Rostov was more andmore confirmed the farther he rode into the region behind the village ofPratzen, which was full of troops of all kinds."What does it mean? What is it? Whom are they firing at? Who is firing?"Rostov kept asking as he came up to Russian and Austrian soldiersrunning in confused crowds across his path."The devil knows! They've killed everybody! It's all up now!" he wastold in Russian, German, and Czech by the crowd of fugitives whounderstood what was happening as little as he did."Kill the Germans!" shouted one."May the devil take them--the traitors!""Zum Henker diese Russen!" * muttered a German.* "Hang these Russians!"Several wounded men passed along the road, and words of abuse, screams,and groans mingled in a general hubbub, then the firing died down.Rostov learned later that Russian and Austrian soldiers had been firingat one another."My God! What does it all mean?" thought he. "And here, where at anymoment the Emperor may see them.... But no, these must be only a handfulof scoundrels. It will soon be over, it can't be that, it can't be! Onlyto get past them quicker, quicker!"The idea of defeat and flight could not enter Rostov's head. Though hesaw French cannon and French troops on the Pratzen Heights just where hehad been ordered to look for the commander-in-chief, he could not, didnot wish to, believe that.CHAPTER XVIIIRostov had been ordered to look for Kutuzov and the Emperor near thevillage of Pratzen. But neither they nor a single commanding officerwere there, only disorganized crowds of troops of various kinds. Heurged on his already weary horse to get quickly past these crowds, butthe farther he went the more disorganized they were. The highroad onwhich he had come out was thronged with caleches, carriages of allsorts, and Russian and Austrian soldiers of all arms, some wounded andsome not. This whole mass droned and jostled in confusion under thedismal influence of cannon balls flying from the French batteriesstationed on the Pratzen Heights."Where is the Emperor? Where is Kutuzov?" Rostov kept asking everyone hecould stop, but got no answer from anyone.At last seizing a soldier by his collar he forced him to answer."Eh, brother! They've all bolted long ago!" said the soldier, laughingfor some reason and shaking himself free.Having left that soldier who was evidently drunk, Rostov stopped thehorse of a batman or groom of some important personage and began toquestion him. The man announced that the Tsar had been driven in acarriage at full speed about an hour before along that very road andthat he was dangerously wounded."It can't be!" said Rostov. "It must have been someone else.""I saw him myself," replied the man with a self-confident smile ofderision. "I ought to know the Emperor by now, after the times I've seenhim in Petersburg. I saw him just as I see you.... There he sat in thecarriage as pale as anything. How they made the four black horses fly!Gracious me, they did rattle past! It's time I knew the Imperial horsesand Ilya Ivanych. I don't think Ilya drives anyone except the Tsar!"Rostov let go of the horse and was about to ride on, when a woundedofficer passing by addressed him:"Who is it you want?" he asked. "The commander-in-chief? He was killedby a cannon ball--struck in the breast before our regiment.""Not killed--wounded!" another officer corrected him."Who? Kutuzov?" asked Rostov."Not Kutuzov, but what's his name--well, never mind... there are notmany left alive. Go that way, to that village, all the commanders arethere," said the officer, pointing to the village of Hosjeradek, and hewalked on.Rostov rode on at a footpace not knowing why or to whom he was nowgoing. The Emperor was wounded, the battle lost. It was impossible todoubt it now. Rostov rode in the direction pointed out to him, in whichhe saw turrets and a church. What need to hurry? What was he now to sayto the Tsar or to Kutuzov, even if they were alive and unwounded?"Take this road, your honor, that way you will be killed at once!" asoldier shouted to him. "They'd kill you there!""Oh, what are you talking about?" said another. "Where is he to go? Thatway is nearer."Rostov considered, and then went in the direction where they said hewould be killed."It's all the same now. If the Emperor is wounded, am I to try to savemyself?" he thought. He rode on to the region where the greatest numberof men had perished in fleeing from Pratzen. The French had not yetoccupied that region, and the Russians--the uninjured and slightlywounded--had left it long ago. All about the field, like heaps of manureon well-kept plowland, lay from ten to fifteen dead and wounded to eachcouple of acres. The wounded crept together in twos and threes and onecould hear their distressing screams and groans, sometimes feigned--orso it seemed to Rostov. He put his horse to a trot to avoid seeing allthese suffering men, and he felt afraid--afraid not for his life, butfor the courage he needed and which he knew would not stand the sight ofthese unfortunates.The French, who had ceased firing at this field strewn with dead andwounded where there was no one left to fire at, on seeing an adjutantriding over it trained a gun on him and fired several shots. Thesensation of those terrible whistling sounds and of the corpses aroundhim merged in Rostov's mind into a single feeling of terror and pity forhimself. He remembered his mother's last letter. "What would she feel,"thought he, "if she saw me here now on this field with the cannon aimedat me?"In the village of Hosjeradek there were Russian troops retiring from thefield of battle, who though still in some confusion were lessdisordered. The French cannon did not reach there and the musketry firesounded far away. Here everyone clearly saw and said that the battle waslost. No one whom Rostov asked could tell him where the Emperor orKutuzov was. Some said the report that the Emperor was wounded wascorrect, others that it was not, and explained the false rumor that hadspread by the fact that the Emperor's carriage had really galloped fromthe field of battle with the pale and terrified Ober-Hofmarschal CountTolstoy, who had ridden out to the battlefield with others in theEmperor's suite. One officer told Rostov that he had seen someone fromheadquarters behind the village to the left, and thither Rostov rode,not hoping to find anyone but merely to ease his conscience. When he hadridden about two miles and had passed the last of the Russian troops, hesaw, near a kitchen garden with a ditch round it, two men on horsebackfacing the ditch. One with a white plume in his hat seemed familiar toRostov; the other on a beautiful chestnut horse (which Rostov fancied hehad seen before) rode up to the ditch, struck his horse with his spurs,and giving it the rein leaped lightly over. Only a little earth crumbledfrom the bank under the horse's hind hoofs. Turning the horse sharply,he again jumped the ditch, and deferentially addressed the horseman withthe white plumes, evidently suggesting that he should do the same. Therider, whose figure seemed familiar to Rostov and involuntarily rivetedhis attention, made a gesture of refusal with his head and hand and bythat gesture Rostov instantly recognized his lamented and adoredmonarch."But it can't be he, alone in the midst of this empty field!" thoughtRostov. At that moment Alexander turned his head and Rostov saw thebeloved features that were so deeply engraved on his memory. The Emperorwas pale, his cheeks sunken and his eyes hollow, but the charm, themildness of his features, was all the greater. Rostov was happy in theassurance that the rumors about the Emperor being wounded were false. Hewas happy to be seeing him. He knew that he might and even ought to gostraight to him and give the message Dolgorukov had ordered him todeliver.But as a youth in love trembles, is unnerved, and dares not utter thethoughts he has dreamed of for nights, but looks around for help or achance of delay and flight when the longed-for moment comes and he isalone with her, so Rostov, now that he had attained what he had longedfor more than anything else in the world, did not know how to approachthe Emperor, and a thousand reasons occurred to him why it would beinconvenient, unseemly, and impossible to do so."What! It is as if I were glad of a chance to take advantage of hisbeing alone and despondent! A strange face may seem unpleasant orpainful to him at this moment of sorrow; besides, what can I say to himnow, when my heart fails me and my mouth feels dry at the mere sight ofhim?" Not one of the innumerable speeches addressed to the Emperor thathe had composed in his imagination could he now recall. Those speecheswere intended for quite other conditions, they were for the most part tobe spoken at a moment of victory and triumph, generally when he wasdying of wounds and the sovereign had thanked him for heroic deeds, andwhile dying he expressed the love his actions had proved."Besides how can I ask the Emperor for his instructions for the rightflank now that it is nearly four o'clock and the battle is lost? No,certainly I must not approach him, I must not intrude on hisreflections. Better die a thousand times than risk receiving an unkindlook or bad opinion from him," Rostov decided; and sorrowfully and witha heart full despair he rode away, continually looking back at the Tsar,who still remained in the same attitude of indecision.While Rostov was thus arguing with himself and riding sadly away,Captain von Toll chanced to ride to the same spot, and seeing theEmperor at once rode up to him, offered his services, and assisted himto cross the ditch on foot. The Emperor, wishing to rest and feelingunwell, sat down under an apple tree and von Toll remained beside him.Rostov from a distance saw with envy and remorse how von Toll spoke longand warmly to the Emperor and how the Emperor, evidently weeping,covered his eyes with his hand and pressed von Toll's hand."And I might have been in his place!" thought Rostov, and hardlyrestraining his tears of pity for the Emperor, he rode on in utterdespair, not knowing where to or why he was now riding.His despair was all the greater from feeling that his own weakness wasthe cause of his grief.He might... not only might but should, have gone up to the sovereign. Itwas a unique chance to show his devotion to the Emperor and he had notmade use of it.... "What have I done?" thought he. And he turned roundand galloped back to the place where he had seen the Emperor, but therewas no one beyond the ditch now. Only some carts and carriages werepassing by. From one of the drivers he learned that Kutuzov's staff werenot far off, in the village the vehicles were going to. Rostov followedthem. In front of him walked Kutuzov's groom leading horses inhorsecloths. Then came a cart, and behind that walked an old, bandy-legged domestic serf in a peaked cap and sheepskin coat."Tit! I say, Tit!" said the groom."What?" answered the old man absent-mindedly."Go, Tit! Thresh a bit!""Oh, you fool!" said the old man, spitting angrily. Some time passed insilence, and then the same joke was repeated.Before five in the evening the battle had been lost at all points. Morethan a hundred cannon were already in the hands of the French.Przebyszewski and his corps had laid down their arms. Other columnsafter losing half their men were retreating in disorderly confusedmasses.The remains of Langeron's and Dokhturov's mingled forces were crowdingaround the dams and banks of the ponds near the village of Augesd.After five o'clock it was only at the Augesd Dam that a hot cannonade(delivered by the French alone) was still to be heard from numerousbatteries ranged on the slopes of the Pratzen Heights, directed at ourretreating forces.In the rearguard, Dokhturov and others rallying some battalions kept upa musketry fire at the French cavalry that was pursuing our troops. Itwas growing dusk. On the narrow Augesd Dam where for so many years theold miller had been accustomed to sit in his tasseled cap peacefullyangling, while his grandson, with shirt sleeves rolled up, handled thefloundering silvery fish in the watering can, on that dam over which forso many years Moravians in shaggy caps and blue jackets had peacefullydriven their two-horse carts loaded with wheat and had returned dustywith flour whitening their carts--on that narrow dam amid the wagons andthe cannon, under the horses' hoofs and between the wagon wheels, mendisfigured by fear of death now crowded together, crushing one another,dying, stepping over the dying and killing one another, only to move ona few steps and be killed themselves in the same way.Every ten seconds a cannon ball flew compressing the air around, or ashell burst in the midst of that dense throng, killing some andsplashing with blood those near them.Dolokhov--now an officer--wounded in the arm, and on foot, with theregimental commander on horseback and some ten men of his company,represented all that was left of that whole regiment. Impelled by thecrowd, they had got wedged in at the approach to the dam and, jammed inon all sides, had stopped because a horse in front had fallen under acannon and the crowd were dragging it out. A cannon ball killed someonebehind them, another fell in front and splashed Dolokhov with blood. Thecrowd, pushing forward desperately, squeezed together, moved a fewsteps, and again stopped."Move on a hundred yards and we are certainly saved, remain here anothertwo minutes and it is certain death," thought each one.Dolokhov who was in the midst of the crowd forced his way to the edge ofthe dam, throwing two soldiers off their feet, and ran onto the slipperyice that covered the millpool."Turn this way!" he shouted, jumping over the ice which creaked underhim; "turn this way!" he shouted to those with the gun. "It bears!..."The ice bore him but it swayed and creaked, and it was plain that itwould give way not only under a cannon or a crowd, but very soon evenunder his weight alone. The men looked at him and pressed to the bank,hesitating to step onto the ice. The general on horseback at theentrance to the dam raised his hand and opened his mouth to addressDolokhov. Suddenly a cannon ball hissed so low above the crowd thateveryone ducked. It flopped into something moist, and the general fellfrom his horse in a pool of blood. Nobody gave him a look or thought ofraising him."Get onto the ice, over the ice! Go on! Turn! Don't you hear? Go on!"innumerable voices suddenly shouted after the ball had struck thegeneral, the men themselves not knowing what, or why, they wereshouting.One of the hindmost guns that was going onto the dam turned off onto theice. Crowds of soldiers from the dam began running onto the frozen pond.The ice gave way under one of the foremost soldiers, and one leg slippedinto the water. He tried to right himself but fell in up to his waist.The nearest soldiers shrank back, the gun driver stopped his horse, butfrom behind still came the shouts: "Onto the ice, why do you stop? Goon! Go on!" And cries of horror were heard in the crowd. The soldiersnear the gun waved their arms and beat the horses to make them turn andmove on. The horses moved off the bank. The ice, that had held underthose on foot, collapsed in a great mass, and some forty men who were onit dashed, some forward and some back, drowning one another.Still the cannon balls continued regularly to whistle and flop onto theice and into the water and oftenest of all among the crowd that coveredthe dam, the pond, and the bank.CHAPTER XIXOn the Pratzen Heights, where he had fallen with the flagstaff in hishand, lay Prince Andrew Bolkonski bleeding profusely and unconsciouslyuttering a gentle, piteous, and childlike moan.Toward evening he ceased moaning and became quite still. He did not knowhow long his unconsciousness lasted. Suddenly he again felt that he wasalive and suffering from a burning, lacerating pain in his head."Where is it, that lofty sky that I did not know till now, but sawtoday?" was his first thought. "And I did not know this sufferingeither," he thought. "Yes, I did not know anything, anything at all tillnow. But where am I?"He listened and heard the sound of approaching horses, and voicesspeaking French. He opened his eyes. Above him again was the same loftysky with clouds that had risen and were floating still higher, andbetween them gleamed blue infinity. He did not turn his head and did notsee those who, judging by the sound of hoofs and voices, had ridden upand stopped near him.It was Napoleon accompanied by two aides-de-camp. Bonaparte riding overthe battlefield had given final orders to strengthen the batteriesfiring at the Augesd Dam and was looking at the killed and wounded lefton the field."Fine men!" remarked Napoleon, looking at a dead Russian grenadier, who,with his face buried in the ground and a blackened nape, lay on hisstomach with an already stiffened arm flung wide."The ammunition for the guns in position is exhausted, Your Majesty,"said an adjutant who had come from the batteries that were firing atAugesd."Have some brought from the reserve," said Napoleon, and having gone ona few steps he stopped before Prince Andrew, who lay on his back withthe flagstaff that had been dropped beside him. (The flag had alreadybeen taken by the French as a trophy.)"That's a fine death!" said Napoleon as he gazed at Bolkonski.Prince Andrew understood that this was said of him and that it wasNapoleon who said it. He heard the speaker addressed as Sire. But heheard the words as he might have heard the buzzing of a fly. Not onlydid they not interest him, but he took no notice of them and at onceforgot them. His head was burning, he felt himself bleeding to death,and he saw above him the remote, lofty, and everlasting sky. He knew itwas Napoleon--his hero--but at that moment Napoleon seemed to him such asmall, insignificant creature compared with what was passing now betweenhimself and that lofty infinite sky with the clouds flying over it. Atthat moment it meant nothing to him who might be standing over him, orwhat was said of him; he was only glad that people were standing nearhim and only wished that they would help him and bring him back to life,which seemed to him so beautiful now that he had today learned tounderstand it so differently. He collected all his strength, to stir andutter a sound. He feebly moved his leg and uttered a weak, sickly groanwhich aroused his own pity."Ah! He is alive," said Napoleon. "Lift this young man up and carry himto the dressing station."Having said this, Napoleon rode on to meet Marshal Lannes, who, hat inhand, rode up smiling to the Emperor to congratulate him on the victory.Prince Andrew remembered nothing more: he lost consciousness from theterrible pain of being lifted onto the stretcher, the jolting whilebeing moved, and the probing of his wound at the dressing station. Hedid not regain consciousness till late in the day, when with otherwounded and captured Russian officers he was carried to the hospital.During this transfer he felt a little stronger and was able to lookabout him and even speak.The first words he heard on coming to his senses were those of a Frenchconvoy officer, who said rapidly: "We must halt here: the Emperor willpass here immediately; it will please him to see these gentlemenprisoners.""There are so many prisoners today, nearly the whole Russian army, thathe is probably tired of them," said another officer."All the same! They say this one is the commander of all the EmperorAlexander's Guards," said the first one, indicating a Russian officer inthe white uniform of the Horse Guards.Bolkonski recognized Prince Repnin whom he had met in Petersburgsociety. Beside him stood a lad of nineteen, also a wounded officer ofthe Horse Guards.Bonaparte, having come up at a gallop, stopped his horse."Which is the senior?" he asked, on seeing the prisoners.They named the colonel, Prince Repnin."You are the commander of the Emperor Alexander's regiment of HorseGuards?" asked Napoleon."I commanded a squadron," replied Repnin."Your regiment fulfilled its duty honorably," said Napoleon."The praise of a great commander is a soldier's highest reward," saidRepnin."I bestow it with pleasure," said Napoleon. "And who is that young manbeside you?"Prince Repnin named Lieutenant Sukhtelen.After looking at him Napoleon smiled."He's very young to come to meddle with us.""Youth is no hindrance to courage," muttered Sukhtelen in a failingvoice."A splendid reply!" said Napoleon. "Young man, you will go far!"Prince Andrew, who had also been brought forward before the Emperor'seyes to complete the show of prisoners, could not fail to attract hisattention. Napoleon apparently remembered seeing him on the battlefieldand, addressing him, again used the epithet "young man" that wasconnected in his memory with Prince Andrew."Well, and you, young man," said he. "How do you feel, mon brave?"Though five minutes before, Prince Andrew had been able to say a fewwords to the soldiers who were carrying him, now with his eyes fixedstraight on Napoleon, he was silent.... So insignificant at that momentseemed to him all the interests that engrossed Napoleon, so mean did hishero himself with his paltry vanity and joy in victory appear, comparedto the lofty, equitable, and kindly sky which he had seen andunderstood, that he could not answer him.Everything seemed so futile and insignificant in comparison with thestern and solemn train of thought that weakness from loss of blood,suffering, and the nearness of death aroused in him. Looking intoNapoleon's eyes Prince Andrew thought of the insignificance ofgreatness, the unimportance of life which no one could understand, andthe still greater unimportance of death, the meaning of which no onealive could understand or explain.The Emperor without waiting for an answer turned away and said to one ofthe officers as he went: "Have these gentlemen attended to and taken tomy bivouac; let my doctor, Larrey, examine their wounds. Au revoir,Prince Repnin!" and he spurred his horse and galloped away.His face shone with self-satisfaction and pleasure.The soldiers who had carried Prince Andrew had noticed and taken thelittle gold icon Princess Mary had hung round her brother's neck, butseeing the favor the Emperor showed the prisoners, they now hastened toreturn the holy image.Prince Andrew did not see how and by whom it was replaced, but thelittle icon with its thin gold chain suddenly appeared upon his chestoutside his uniform."It would be good," thought Prince Andrew, glancing at the icon hissister had hung round his neck with such emotion and reverence, "itwould be good if everything were as clear and simple as it seems toMary. How good it would be to know where to seek for help in this life,and what to expect after it beyond the grave! How happy and calm Ishould be if I could now say: 'Lord, have mercy on me!'... But to whomshould I say that? Either to a Power indefinable, incomprehensible,which I not only cannot address but which I cannot even express inwords--the Great All or Nothing-" said he to himself, "or to that Godwho has been sewn into this amulet by Mary! There is nothing certain,nothing at all except the unimportance of everything I understand, andthe greatness of something incomprehensible but all-important."The stretchers moved on. At every jolt he again felt unendurable pain;his feverishness increased and he grew delirious. Visions of his father,wife, sister, and future son, and the tenderness he had felt the nightbefore the battle, the figure of the insignificant little Napoleon, andabove all this the lofty sky, formed the chief subjects of his deliriousfancies.The quiet home life and peaceful happiness of Bald Hills presenteditself to him. He was already enjoying that happiness when that littleNapoleon had suddenly appeared with his unsympathizing look ofshortsighted delight at the misery of others, and doubts and tormentshad followed, and only the heavens promised peace. Toward morning allthese dreams melted and merged into the chaos and darkness ofunconciousness and oblivion which in the opinion of Napoleon's doctor,Larrey, was much more likely to end in death than in convalescence."He is a nervous, bilious subject," said Larrey, "and will not recover."And Prince Andrew, with others fatally wounded, was left to the care ofthe inhabitants of the district.BOOK FOUR: 1806CHAPTER IEarly in the year 1806 Nicholas Rostov returned home on leave. Denisovwas going home to Voronezh and Rostov persuaded him to travel with himas far as Moscow and to stay with him there. Meeting a comrade at thelast post station but one before Moscow, Denisov had drunk three bottlesof wine with him and, despite the jolting ruts across the snow-coveredroad, did not once wake up on the way to Moscow, but lay at the bottomof the sleigh beside Rostov, who grew more and more impatient the nearerthey got to Moscow."How much longer? How much longer? Oh, these insufferable streets,shops, bakers' signboards, street lamps, and sleighs!" thought Rostov,when their leave permits had been passed at the town gate and they hadentered Moscow."Denisov! We're here! He's asleep," he added, leaning forward with hiswhole body as if in that position he hoped to hasten the speed of thesleigh.Denisov gave no answer."There's the corner at the crossroads, where the cabman, Zakhar, has hisstand, and there's Zakhar himself and still the same horse! And here'sthe little shop where we used to buy gingerbread! Can't you hurry up?Now then!""Which house is it?" asked the driver."Why, that one, right at the end, the big one. Don't you see? That's ourhouse," said Rostov. "Of course, it's our house! Denisov, Denisov! We'realmost there!"Denisov raised his head, coughed, and made no answer."Dmitri," said Rostov to his valet on the box, "those lights are in ourhouse, aren't they?""Yes, sir, and there's a light in your father's study.""Then they've not gone to bed yet? What do you think? Mind now, don'tforget to put out my new coat," added Rostov, fingering his newmustache. "Now then, get on," he shouted to the driver. "Do wake up,Vaska!" he went on, turning to Denisov, whose head was again nodding."Come, get on! You shall have three rubles for vodka--get on!" Rostovshouted, when the sleigh was only three houses from his door. It seemedto him the horses were not moving at all. At last the sleigh bore to theright, drew up at an entrance, and Rostov saw overhead the old familiarcornice with a bit of plaster broken off, the porch, and the post by theside of the pavement. He sprang out before the sleigh stopped, and raninto the hall. The house stood cold and silent, as if quite regardlessof who had come to it. There was no one in the hall. "Oh God! Iseveryone all right?" he thought, stopping for a moment with a sinkingheart, and then immediately starting to run along the hall and up thewarped steps of the familiar staircase. The well-known old door handle,which always angered the countess when it was not properly cleaned,turned as loosely as ever. A solitary tallow candle burned in theanteroom.Old Michael was asleep on the chest. Prokofy, the footman, who was sostrong that he could lift the back of the carriage from behind, satplaiting slippers out of cloth selvedges. He looked up at the openingdoor and his expression of sleepy indifference suddenly changed to oneof delighted amazement."Gracious heavens! The young count!" he cried, recognizing his youngmaster. "Can it be? My treasure!" and Prokofy, trembling withexcitement, rushed toward the drawing-room door, probably in order toannounce him, but, changing his mind, came back and stooped to kiss theyoung man's shoulder."All well?" asked Rostov, drawing away his arm."Yes, God be thanked! Yes! They've just finished supper. Let me have alook at you, your excellency.""Is everything quite all right?""The Lord be thanked, yes!"Rostov, who had completely forgotten Denisov, not wishing anyone toforestall him, threw off his fur coat and ran on tiptoe through thelarge dark ballroom. All was the same: there were the same old cardtables and the same chandelier with a cover over it; but someone hadalready seen the young master, and, before he had reached the drawingroom, something flew out from a side door like a tornado and beganhugging and kissing him. Another and yet another creature of the samekind sprang from a second door and a third; more hugging, more kissing,more outcries, and tears of joy. He could not distinguish which wasPapa, which Natasha, and which Petya. Everyone shouted, talked, andkissed him at the same time. Only his mother was not there, he noticedthat."And I did not know... Nicholas... My darling!...""Here he is... our own... Kolya, * dear fellow... How he has changed!...Where are the candles?... Tea!..."* Nicholas."And me, kiss me!""Dearest... and me!"Sonya, Natasha, Petya, Anna Mikhaylovna, Vera, and the old count wereall hugging him, and the serfs, men and maids, flocked into the room,exclaiming and oh-ing and ah-ing.Petya, clinging to his legs, kept shouting, "And me too!"Natasha, after she had pulled him down toward her and covered his facewith kisses, holding him tight by the skirt of his coat, sprang away andpranced up and down in one place like a goat and shrieked piercingly.All around were loving eyes glistening with tears of joy, and all aroundwere lips seeking a kiss.Sonya too, all rosy red, clung to his arm and, radiant with bliss,looked eagerly toward his eyes, waiting for the look for which shelonged. Sonya now was sixteen and she was very pretty, especially atthis moment of happy, rapturous excitement. She gazed at him, not takingher eyes off him, and smiling and holding her breath. He gave her agrateful look, but was still expectant and looking for someone. The oldcountess had not yet come. But now steps were heard at the door, stepsso rapid that they could hardly be his mother's.Yet it was she, dressed in a new gown which he did not know, made sincehe had left. All the others let him go, and he ran to her. When theymet, she fell on his breast, sobbing. She could not lift her face, butonly pressed it to the cold braiding of his hussar's jacket. Denisov,who had come into the room unnoticed by anyone, stood there and wipedhis eyes at the sight."Vasili Denisov, your son's friend," he said, introducing himself to thecount, who was looking inquiringly at him."You are most welcome! I know, I know," said the count, kissing andembracing Denisov. "Nicholas wrote us... Natasha, Vera, look! Here isDenisov!"The same happy, rapturous faces turned to the shaggy figure of Denisov."Darling Denisov!" screamed Natasha, beside herself with rapture,springing to him, putting her arms round him, and kissing him. Thisescapade made everybody feel confused. Denisov blushed too, but smiledand, taking Natasha's hand, kissed it.Denisov was shown to the room prepared for him, and the Rostovs allgathered round Nicholas in the sitting room.The old countess, not letting go of his hand and kissing it everymoment, sat beside him: the rest, crowding round him, watched everymovement, word, or look of his, never taking their blissfully adoringeyes off him. His brother and sisters struggled for the places nearestto him and disputed with one another who should bring him his tea,handkerchief, and pipe.Rostov was very happy in the love they showed him; but the first momentof meeting had been so beatific that his present joy seemedinsufficient, and he kept expecting something more, more and yet more.Next morning, after the fatigues of their journey, the travelers slepttill ten o'clock.In the room next their bedroom there was a confusion of sabers,satchels, sabretaches, open portmanteaus, and dirty boots. Two freshlycleaned pairs with spurs had just been placed by the wall. The servantswere bringing in jugs and basins, hot water for shaving, and their well-brushed clothes. There was a masculine odor and a smell of tobacco."Hallo, Gwiska--my pipe!" came Vasili Denisov's husky voice. "Wostov,get up!"Rostov, rubbing his eyes that seemed glued together, raised hisdisheveled head from the hot pillow."Why, is it late?""Late! It's nearly ten o'clock," answered Natasha's voice. A rustle ofstarched petticoats and the whispering and laughter of girls' voicescame from the adjoining room. The door was opened a crack and there wasa glimpse of something blue, of ribbons, black hair, and merry faces. Itwas Natasha, Sonya, and Petya, who had come to see whether they weregetting up."Nicholas! Get up!" Natasha's voice was again heard at the door."Directly!"Meanwhile, Petya, having found and seized the sabers in the outer room,with the delight boys feel at the sight of a military elder brother, andforgetting that it was unbecoming for the girls to see men undressed,opened the bedroom door."Is this your saber?" he shouted.The girls sprang aside. Denisov hid his hairy legs under the blanket,looking with a scared face at his comrade for help. The door, having letPetya in, closed again. A sound of laughter came from behind it."Nicholas! Come out in your dressing gown!" said Natasha's voice."Is this your saber?" asked Petya. "Or is it yours?" he said, addressingthe black-mustached Denisov with servile deference.Rostov hurriedly put something on his feet, drew on his dressing gown,and went out. Natasha had put on one spurred boot and was just gettingher foot into the other. Sonya, when he came in, was twirling round andwas about to expand her dresses into a balloon and sit down. They weredressed alike, in new pale-blue frocks, and were both fresh, rosy, andbright. Sonya ran away, but Natasha, taking her brother's arm, led himinto the sitting room, where they began talking. They hardly gave oneanother time to ask questions and give replies concerning a thousandlittle matters which could not interest anyone but themselves. Natashalaughed at every word he said or that she said herself, not because whatthey were saying was amusing, but because she felt happy and was unableto control her joy which expressed itself by laughter."Oh, how nice, how splendid!" she said to everything.Rostov felt that, under the influence of the warm rays of love, thatchildlike smile which had not once appeared on his face since he lefthome now for the first time after eighteen months again brightened hissoul and his face."No, but listen," she said, "now you are quite a man, aren't you? I'mawfully glad you're my brother." She touched his mustache. "I want toknow what you men are like. Are you the same as we? No?""Why did Sonya run away?" asked Rostov."Ah, yes! That's a whole long story! How are you going to speak to her--thou or you?""As may happen," said Rostov."No, call her you, please! I'll tell you all about it some other time.No, I'll tell you now. You know Sonya's my dearest friend. Such a friendthat I burned my arm for her sake. Look here!"She pulled up her muslin sleeve and showed him a red scar on her long,slender, delicate arm, high above the elbow on that part that is coveredeven by a ball dress."I burned this to prove my love for her. I just heated a ruler in thefire and pressed it there!"Sitting on the sofa with the little cushions on its arms, in what usedto be his old schoolroom, and looking into Natasha's wildly bright eyes,Rostov re-entered that world of home and childhood which had no meaningfor anyone else, but gave him some of the best joys of his life; and theburning of an arm with a ruler as a proof of love did not seem to himsenseless, he understood and was not surprised at it."Well, and is that all?" he asked."We are such friends, such friends! All that ruler business was justnonsense, but we are friends forever. She, if she loves anyone, does itfor life, but I don't understand that, I forget quickly.""Well, what then?""Well, she loves me and you like that."Natasha suddenly flushed."Why, you remember before you went away?... Well, she says you are toforget all that.... She says: 'I shall love him always, but let him befree.' Isn't that lovely and noble! Yes, very noble? Isn't it?" askedNatasha, so seriously and excitedly that it was evident that what shewas now saying she had talked of before, with tears.Rostov became thoughtful."I never go back on my word," he said. "Besides, Sonya is so charmingthat only a fool would renounce such happiness.""No, no!" cried Natasha, "she and I have already talked it over. We knewyou'd say so. But it won't do, because you see, if you say that--if youconsider yourself bound by your promise--it will seem as if she had notmeant it seriously. It makes it as if you were marrying her because youmust, and that wouldn't do at all."Rostov saw that it had been well considered by them. Sonya had alreadystruck him by her beauty on the preceding day. Today, when he had caughta glimpse of her, she seemed still more lovely. She was a charming girlof sixteen, evidently passionately in love with him (he did not doubtthat for an instant). Why should he not love her now, and even marryher, Rostov thought, but just now there were so many other pleasures andinterests before him! "Yes, they have taken a wise decision," hethought, "I must remain free.""Well then, that's excellent," said he. "We'll talk it over later on.Oh, how glad I am to have you!""Well, and are you still true to Boris?" he continued."Oh, what nonsense!" cried Natasha, laughing. "I don't think about himor anyone else, and I don't want anything of the kind.""Dear me! Then what are you up to now?""Now?" repeated Natasha, and a happy smile lit up her face. "Have youseen Duport?""No.""Not seen Duport--the famous dancer? Well then, you won't understand.That's what I'm up to."Curving her arms, Natasha held out her skirts as dancers do, ran back afew steps, turned, cut a caper, brought her little feet sharplytogether, and made some steps on the very tips of her toes."See, I'm standing! See!" she said, but could not maintain herself onher toes any longer. "So that's what I'm up to! I'll never marry anyone,but will be a dancer. Only don't tell anyone."Rostov laughed so loud and merrily that Denisov, in his bedroom, feltenvious and Natasha could not help joining in."No, but don't you think it's nice?" she kept repeating."Nice! And so you no longer wish to marry Boris?"Natasha flared up. "I don't want to marry anyone. And I'll tell him sowhen I see him!""Dear me!" said Rostov."But that's all rubbish," Natasha chattered on. "And is Denisov nice?"she asked."Yes, indeed!""Oh, well then, good-by: go and dress. Is he very terrible, Denisov?""Why terrible?" asked Nicholas. "No, Vaska is a splendid fellow.""You call him Vaska? That's funny! And is he very nice?""Very.""Well then, be quick. We'll all have breakfast together."And Natasha rose and went out of the room on tiptoe, like a balletdancer, but smiling as only happy girls of fifteen can smile. WhenRostov met Sonya in the drawing room, he reddened. He did not know howto behave with her. The evening before, in the first happy moment ofmeeting, they had kissed each other, but today they felt it could not bedone; he felt that everybody, including his mother and sisters, waslooking inquiringly at him and watching to see how he would behave withher. He kissed her hand and addressed her not as thou but as you--Sonya.But their eyes met and said thou, and exchanged tender kisses. Her looksasked him to forgive her for having dared, by Natasha's intermediacy, toremind him of his promise, and then thanked him for his love. His looksthanked her for offering him his freedom and told her that one way oranother he would never cease to love her, for that would be impossible."How strange it is," said Vera, selecting a moment when all were silent,"that Sonya and Nicholas now say you to one another and meet likestrangers."Vera's remark was correct, as her remarks always were, but, like most ofher observations, it made everyone feel uncomfortable, not only Sonya,Nicholas, and Natasha, but even the old countess, who--dreading thislove affair which might hinder Nicholas from making a brilliant match--blushed like a girl.Denisov, to Rostov's surprise, appeared in the drawing room with pomadedhair, perfumed, and in a new uniform, looking just as smart as he madehimself when going into battle, and he was more amiable to the ladiesand gentlemen than Rostov had ever expected to see him.CHAPTER IIOn his return to Moscow from the army, Nicholas Rostov was welcomed byhis home circle as the best of sons, a hero, and their darlingNikolenka; by his relations as a charming, attractive, and polite youngman; by his acquaintances as a handsome lieutenant of hussars, a gooddancer, and one of the best matches in the city.The Rostovs knew everybody in Moscow. The old count had money enoughthat year, as all his estates had been remortgaged, and so Nicholas,acquiring a trotter of his own, very stylish riding breeches of thelatest cut, such as no one else yet had in Moscow, and boots of thelatest fashion, with extremely pointed toes and small silver spurs,passed his time very gaily. After a short period of adapting himself tothe old conditions of life, Nicholas found it very pleasant to be athome again. He felt that he had grown up and matured very much. Hisdespair at failing in a Scripture examination, his borrowing money fromGavril to pay a sleigh driver, his kissing Sonya on the sly--he nowrecalled all this as childishness he had left immeasurably behind. Nowhe was a lieutenant of hussars, in a jacket laced with silver, andwearing the Cross of St. George, awarded to soldiers for bravery inaction, and in the company of well-known, elderly, and respected racingmen was training a trotter of his own for a race. He knew a lady on oneof the boulevards whom he visited of an evening. He led the mazurka atthe Arkharovs' ball, talked about the war with Field Marshal Kamenski,visited the English Club, and was on intimate terms with a colonel offorty to whom Denisov had introduced him.His passion for the Emperor had cooled somewhat in Moscow. But still, ashe did not see him and had no opportunity of seeing him, he often spokeabout him and about his love for him, letting it be understood that hehad not told all and that there was something in his feelings for theEmperor not everyone could understand, and with his whole soul he sharedthe adoration then common in Moscow for the Emperor, who was spoken ofas the "angel incarnate."During Rostov's short stay in Moscow, before rejoining the army, he didnot draw closer to Sonya, but rather drifted away from her. She was verypretty and sweet, and evidently deeply in love with him, but he was atthe period of youth when there seems so much to do that there is no timefor that sort of thing and a young man fears to bind himself and prizeshis freedom which he needs for so many other things. When he thought ofSonya, during this stay in Moscow, he said to himself, "Ah, there willbe, and there are, many more such girls somewhere whom I do not yetknow. There will be time enough to think about love when I want to, butnow I have no time." Besides, it seemed to him that the society of womenwas rather derogatory to his manhood. He went to balls and into ladies'society with an affectation of doing so against his will. The races, theEnglish Club, sprees with Denisov, and visits to a certain house--thatwas another matter and quite the thing for a dashing young hussar!At the beginning of March, old Count Ilya Rostov was very busy arranginga dinner in honor of Prince Bagration at the English Club.The count walked up and down the hall in his dressing gown, givingorders to the club steward and to the famous Feoktist, the club's headcook, about asparagus, fresh cucumbers, strawberries, veal, and fish forthis dinner. The count had been a member and on the committee of theclub from the day it was founded. To him the club entrusted thearrangement of the festival in honor of Bagration, for few men knew sowell how to arrange a feast on an open-handed, hospitable scale, andstill fewer men would be so well able and willing to make up out oftheir own resources what might be needed for the success of the fete.The club cook and the steward listened to the count's orders withpleased faces, for they knew that under no other management could theyso easily extract a good profit for themselves from a dinner costingseveral thousand rubles."Well then, mind and have cocks' comb in the turtle soup, you know!""Shall we have three cold dishes then?" asked the cook.The count considered."We can't have less--yes, three... the mayonnaise, that's one," said he,bending down a finger."Then am I to order those large sterlets?" asked the steward."Yes, it can't be helped if they won't take less. Ah, dear me! I wasforgetting. We must have another entree. Ah, goodness gracious!" heclutched at his head. "Who is going to get me the flowers? Dmitri! Eh,Dmitri! Gallop off to our Moscow estate," he said to the factotum whoappeared at his call. "Hurry off and tell Maksim, the gardener, to setthe serfs to work. Say that everything out of the hothouses must bebrought here well wrapped up in felt. I must have two hundred pots hereon Friday."Having given several more orders, he was about to go to his "littlecountess" to have a rest, but remembering something else of importance,he returned again, called back the cook and the club steward, and againbegan giving orders. A light footstep and the clinking of spurs wereheard at the door, and the young count, handsome, rosy, with a darklittle mustache, evidently rested and made sleeker by his easy life inMoscow, entered the room."Ah, my boy, my head's in a whirl!" said the old man with a smile, as ifhe felt a little confused before his son. "Now, if you would only help abit! I must have singers too. I shall have my own orchestra, butshouldn't we get the gypsy singers as well? You military men like thatsort of thing.""Really, Papa, I believe Prince Bagration worried himself less beforethe battle of Schon Grabern than you do now," said his son with a smile.The old count pretended to be angry."Yes, you talk, but try it yourself!"And the count turned to the cook, who, with a shrewd and respectfulexpression, looked observantly and sympathetically at the father andson."What have the young people come to nowadays, eh, Feoktist?" said he."Laughing at us old fellows!""That's so, your excellency, all they have to do is to eat a gooddinner, but providing it and serving it all up, that's not theirbusiness!""That's it, that's it!" exclaimed the count, and gaily seizing his sonby both hands, he cried, "Now I've got you, so take the sleigh and pairat once, and go to Bezukhov's, and tell him 'Count Ilya has sent you toask for strawberries and fresh pineapples.' We can't get them fromanyone else. He's not there himself, so you'll have to go in and ask theprincesses; and from there go on to the Rasgulyay--the coachman Ipatkaknows--and look up the gypsy Ilyushka, the one who danced at CountOrlov's, you remember, in a white Cossack coat, and bring him along tome.""And am I to bring the gypsy girls along with him?" asked Nicholas,laughing. "Dear, dear!..."At that moment, with noiseless footsteps and with the businesslike,preoccupied, yet meekly Christian look which never left her face, AnnaMikhaylovna entered the hall. Though she came upon the count in hisdressing gown every day, he invariably became confused and begged her toexcuse his costume."No matter at all, my dear count," she said, meekly closing her eyes."But I'll go to Bezukhov's myself. Pierre has arrived, and now we shallget anything we want from his hothouses. I have to see him in any case.He has forwarded me a letter from Boris. Thank God, Boris is now on thestaff."The count was delighted at Anna Mikhaylovna's taking upon herself one ofhis commissions and ordered the small closed carriage for her."Tell Bezukhov to come. I'll put his name down. Is his wife with him?"he asked.Anna Mikhaylovna turned up her eyes, and profound sadness was depictedon her face."Ah, my dear friend, he is very unfortunate," she said. "If what we hearis true, it is dreadful. How little we dreamed of such a thing when wewere rejoicing at his happiness! And such a lofty angelic soul as youngBezukhov! Yes, I pity him from my heart, and shall try to give him whatconsolation I can.""Wh-what is the matter?" asked both the young and old Rostov.Anna Mikhaylovna sighed deeply."Dolokhov, Mary Ivanovna's son," she said in a mysterious whisper, "hascompromised her completely, they say. Pierre took him up, invited him tohis house in Petersburg, and now... she has come here and that daredevilafter her!" said Anna Mikhaylovna, wishing to show her sympathy forPierre, but by involuntary intonations and a half smile betraying hersympathy for the "daredevil," as she called Dolokhov. "They say Pierreis quite broken by his misfortune.""Dear, dear! But still tell him to come to the club--it will all blowover. It will be a tremendous banquet."Next day, the third of March, soon after one o'clock, two hundred andfifty members of the English Club and fifty guests were awaiting theguest of honor and hero of the Austrian campaign, Prince Bagration, todinner.On the first arrival of the news of the battle of Austerlitz, Moscow hadbeen bewildered. At that time, the Russians were so used to victoriesthat on receiving news of the defeat some would simply not believe it,while others sought some extraordinary explanation of so strange anevent. In the English Club, where all who were distinguished, important,and well informed foregathered when the news began to arrive inDecember, nothing was said about the war and the last battle, as thoughall were in a conspiracy of silence. The men who set the tone inconversation--Count Rostopchin, Prince Yuri Dolgorukov, Valuev, CountMarkov, and Prince Vyazemski--did not show themselves at the club, butmet in private houses in intimate circles, and the Moscovites who tooktheir opinions from others--Ilya Rostov among them--remained for a whilewithout any definite opinion on the subject of the war and withoutleaders. The Moscovites felt that something was wrong and that todiscuss the bad news was difficult, and so it was best to be silent. Butafter a while, just as a jury comes out of its room, the bigwigs whoguided the club's opinion reappeared, and everybody began speakingclearly and definitely. Reasons were found for the incredible, unheard-of, and impossible event of a Russian defeat, everything became clear,and in all corners of Moscow the same things began to be said. Thesereasons were the treachery of the Austrians, a defective commissariat,the treachery of the Pole Przebyszewski and of the Frenchman Langeron,Kutuzov's incapacity, and (it was whispered) the youth and inexperienceof the sovereign, who had trusted worthless and insignificant people.But the army, the Russian army, everyone declared, was extraordinary andhad achieved miracles of valor. The soldiers, officers, and generalswere heroes. But the hero of heroes was Prince Bagration, distinguishedby his Schon Grabern affair and by the retreat from Austerlitz, where healone had withdrawn his column unbroken and had all day beaten back anenemy force twice as numerous as his own. What also conduced toBagration's being selected as Moscow's hero was the fact that he had noconnections in the city and was a stranger there. In his person, honorwas shown to a simple fighting Russian soldier without connections andintrigues, and to one who was associated by memories of the Italiancampaign with the name of Suvorov. Moreover, paying such honor toBagration was the best way of expressing disapproval and dislike ofKutuzov."Had there been no Bagration, it would have been necessary to inventhim," said the wit Shinshin, parodying the words of Voltaire. Kutuzov noone spoke of, except some who abused him in whispers, calling him acourt weathercock and an old satyr.All Moscow repeated Prince Dolgorukov's saying: "If you go on modelingand modeling you must get smeared with clay," suggesting consolation forour defeat by the memory of former victories; and the words ofRostopchin, that French soldiers have to be incited to battle byhighfalutin words, and Germans by logical arguments to show them that itis more dangerous to run away than to advance, but that Russian soldiersonly need to be restrained and held back! On all sides, new and freshanecdotes were heard of individual examples of heroism shown by ourofficers and men at Austerlitz. One had saved a standard, another hadkilled five Frenchmen, a third had loaded five cannon singlehanded. Bergwas mentioned, by those who did not know him, as having, when wounded inthe right hand, taken his sword in the left, and gone forward. OfBolkonski, nothing was said, and only those who knew him intimatelyregretted that he had died so young, leaving a pregnant wife with hiseccentric father.CHAPTER IIIOn that third of March, all the rooms in the English Club were filledwith a hum of conversation, like the hum of bees swarming in springtime.The members and guests of the club wandered hither and thither, sat,stood, met, and separated, some in uniform and some in evening dress,and a few here and there with powdered hair and in Russian kaftans.Powdered footmen, in livery with buckled shoes and smart stockings,stood at every door anxiously noting visitors' every movement in orderto offer their services. Most of those present were elderly, respectedmen with broad, self-confident faces, fat fingers, and resolute gesturesand voices. This class of guests and members sat in certain habitualplaces and met in certain habitual groups. A minority of those presentwere casual guests--chiefly young men, among whom were Denisov, Rostov,and Dolokhov--who was now again an officer in the Semenov regiment. Thefaces of these young people, especially those who were military men,bore that expression of condescending respect for their elders whichseems to say to the older generation, "We are prepared to respect andhonor you, but all the same remember that the future belongs to us."Nesvitski was there as an old member of the club. Pierre, who at hiswife's command had let his hair grow and abandoned his spectacles, wentabout the rooms fashionably dressed but looking sad and dull. Here, aselsewhere, he was surrounded by an atmosphere of subservience to hiswealth, and being in the habit of lording it over these people, hetreated them with absent-minded contempt.By his age he should have belonged to the younger men, but by his wealthand connections he belonged to the groups of old and honored guests, andso he went from one group to another. Some of the most important old menwere the center of groups which even strangers approached respectfullyto hear the voices of well-known men. The largest circles formed roundCount Rostopchin, Valuev, and Naryshkin. Rostopchin was describing howthe Russians had been overwhelmed by flying Austrians and had had toforce their way through them with bayonets.Valuev was confidentially telling that Uvarov had been sent fromPetersburg to ascertain what Moscow was thinking about Austerlitz.In the third circle, Naryshkin was speaking of the meeting of theAustrian Council of War at which Suvorov crowed like a cock in reply tothe nonsense talked by the Austrian generals. Shinshin, standing closeby, tried to make a joke, saying that Kutuzov had evidently failed tolearn from Suvorov even so simple a thing as the art of crowing like acock, but the elder members glanced severely at the wit, making him feelthat in that place and on that day, it was improper to speak so ofKutuzov.Count Ilya Rostov, hurried and preoccupied, went about in his soft bootsbetween the dining and drawing rooms, hastily greeting the important andunimportant, all of whom he knew, as if they were all equals, while hiseyes occasionally sought out his fine well-set-up young son, resting onhim and winking joyfully at him. Young Rostov stood at a window withDolokhov, whose acquaintance he had lately made and highly valued. Theold count came up to them and pressed Dolokhov's hand."Please come and visit us... you know my brave boy... been together outthere... both playing the hero... Ah, Vasili Ignatovich... How d'ye do,old fellow?" he said, turning to an old man who was passing, but beforehe had finished his greeting there was a general stir, and a footman whohad run in announced, with a frightened face: "He's arrived!"Bells rang, the stewards rushed forward, and--like rye shaken togetherin a shovel--the guests who had been scattered about in different roomscame together and crowded in the large drawing room by the door of theballroom.Bagration appeared in the doorway of the anteroom without hat or sword,which, in accord with the club custom, he had given up to the hallporter. He had no lambskin cap on his head, nor had he a loaded whipover his shoulder, as when Rostov had seen him on the eve of the battleof Austerlitz, but wore a tight new uniform with Russian and foreignOrders, and the Star of St. George on his left breast. Evidently justbefore coming to the dinner he had had his hair and whiskers trimmed,which changed his appearance for the worse. There was something naivelyfestive in his air, which, in conjunction with his firm and virilefeatures, gave him a rather comical expression. Bekleshev and TheodoreUvarov, who had arrived with him, paused at the doorway to allow him, asthe guest of honor, to enter first. Bagration was embarrassed, notwishing to avail himself of their courtesy, and this caused some delayat the doors, but after all he did at last enter first. He walked shylyand awkwardly over the parquet floor of the reception room, not knowingwhat to do with his hands; he was more accustomed to walk over a plowedfield under fire, as he had done at the head of the Kursk regiment atSchon Grabern--and he would have found that easier. The committeemen methim at the first door and, expressing their delight at seeing such ahighly honored guest, took possession of him as it were, without waitingfor his reply, surrounded him, and led him to the drawing room. It wasat first impossible to enter the drawing-room door for the crowd ofmembers and guests jostling one another and trying to get a good look atBagration over each other's shoulders, as if he were some rare animal.Count Ilya Rostov, laughing and repeating the words, "Make way, dearboy! Make way, make way!" pushed through the crowd more energeticallythan anyone, led the guests into the drawing room, and seated them onthe center sofa. The bigwigs, the most respected members of the club,beset the new arrivals. Count Ilya, again thrusting his way through thecrowd, went out of the drawing room and reappeared a minute later withanother committeeman, carrying a large silver salver which he presentedto Prince Bagration. On the salver lay some verses composed and printedin the hero's honor. Bagration, on seeing the salver, glanced around indismay, as though seeking help. But all eyes demanded that he shouldsubmit. Feeling himself in their power, he resolutely took the salverwith both hands and looked sternly and reproachfully at the count whohad presented it to him. Someone obligingly took the dish from Bagration(or he would, it seemed, have held it till evening and have gone in todinner with it) and drew his attention to the verses."Well, I will read them, then!" Bagration seemed to say, and, fixing hisweary eyes on the paper, began to read them with a fixed and seriousexpression. But the author himself took the verses and began readingthem aloud. Bagration bowed his head and listened:Bring glory then to Alexander's reign And on the throne our Titusshield. A dreaded foe be thou, kindhearted as a man, A Rhipheus at home,a Caesar in the field! E'en fortunate Napoleon Knows by experience, now,Bagration, And dare not Herculean Russians trouble...But before he had finished reading, a stentorian major-domo announcedthat dinner was ready! The door opened, and from the dining room camethe resounding strains of the polonaise:Conquest's joyful thunder waken, Triumph, valiant Russians, now!...and Count Rostov, glancing angrily at the author who went on reading hisverses, bowed to Bagration. Everyone rose, feeling that dinner was moreimportant than verses, and Bagration, again preceding all the rest, wentin to dinner. He was seated in the place of honor between twoAlexanders--Bekleshev and Naryshkin--which was a significant allusion tothe name of the sovereign. Three hundred persons took their seats in thedining room, according to their rank and importance: the more importantnearer to the honored guest, as naturally as water flows deepest wherethe land lies lowest.Just before dinner, Count Ilya Rostov presented his son to Bagration,who recognized him and said a few words to him, disjointed and awkward,as were all the words he spoke that day, and Count Ilya looked joyfullyand proudly around while Bagration spoke to his son.Nicholas Rostov, with Denisov and his new acquaintance, Dolokhov, satalmost at the middle of the table. Facing them sat Pierre, beside PrinceNesvitski. Count Ilya Rostov with the other members of the committee satfacing Bagration and, as the very personification of Moscow hospitality,did the honors to the prince.His efforts had not been in vain. The dinner, both the Lenten and theother fare, was splendid, yet he could not feel quite at ease till theend of the meal. He winked at the butler, whispered directions to thefootmen, and awaited each expected dish with some anxiety. Everythingwas excellent. With the second course, a gigantic sterlet (at sight ofwhich Ilya Rostov blushed with self-conscious pleasure), the footmenbegan popping corks and filling the champagne glasses. After the fish,which made a certain sensation, the count exchanged glances with theother committeemen. "There will be many toasts, it's time to begin," hewhispered, and taking up his glass, he rose. All were silent, waitingfor what he would say."To the health of our Sovereign, the Emperor!" he cried, and at the samemoment his kindly eyes grew moist with tears of joy and enthusiasm. Theband immediately struck up "Conquest's joyful thunder waken..." All roseand cried "Hurrah!" Bagration also rose and shouted "Hurrah!" in exactlythe same voice in which he had shouted it on the field at Schon Grabern.Young Rostov's ecstatic voice could be heard above the three hundredothers. He nearly wept. "To the health of our Sovereign, the Emperor!"he roared, "Hurrah!" and emptying his glass at one gulp he dashed it tothe floor. Many followed his example, and the loud shouting continuedfor a long time. When the voices subsided, the footmen cleared away thebroken glass and everybody sat down again, smiling at the noise they hadmade and exchanging remarks. The old count rose once more, glanced at anote lying beside his plate, and proposed a toast, "To the health of thehero of our last campaign, Prince Peter Ivanovich Bagration!" and againhis blue eyes grew moist. "Hurrah!" cried the three hundred voicesagain, but instead of the band a choir began singing a cantata composedby Paul Ivanovich Kutuzov:Russians! O'er all barriers on! Courage conquest guarantees; Have we notBagration? He brings foe men to their knees,... etc.As soon as the singing was over, another and another toast was proposedand Count Ilya Rostov became more and more moved, more glass wassmashed, and the shouting grew louder. They drank to Bekleshev,Naryshkin, Uvarov, Dolgorukov, Apraksin, Valuev, to the committee, toall the club members and to all the club guests, and finally to CountIlya Rostov separately, as the organizer of the banquet. At that toast,the count took out his handkerchief and, covering his face, weptoutright.CHAPTER IVPierre sat opposite Dolokhov and Nicholas Rostov. As usual, he ate anddrank much, and eagerly. But those who knew him intimately noticed thatsome great change had come over him that day. He was silent all throughdinner and looked about, blinking and scowling, or, with fixed eyes anda look of complete absent-mindedness, kept rubbing the bridge of hisnose. His face was depressed and gloomy. He seemed to see and hearnothing of what was going on around him and to be absorbed by somedepressing and unsolved problem.The unsolved problem that tormented him was caused by hints given by theprincess, his cousin, at Moscow, concerning Dolokhov's intimacy with hiswife, and by an anonymous letter he had received that morning, which inthe mean jocular way common to anonymous letters said that he saw badlythrough his spectacles, but that his wife's connection with Dolokhov wasa secret to no one but himself. Pierre absolutely disbelieved both theprincess' hints and the letter, but he feared now to look at Dolokhov,who was sitting opposite him. Every time he chanced to meet Dolokhov'shandsome insolent eyes, Pierre felt something terrible and monstrousrising in his soul and turned quickly away. Involuntarily recalling hiswife's past and her relations with Dolokhov, Pierre saw clearly thatwhat was said in the letter might be true, or might at least seem to betrue had it not referred to his wife. He involuntarily remembered howDolokhov, who had fully recovered his former position after thecampaign, had returned to Petersburg and come to him. Availing himselfof his friendly relations with Pierre as a boon companion, Dolokhov hadcome straight to his house, and Pierre had put him up and lent himmoney. Pierre recalled how Helene had smilingly expressed disapproval ofDolokhov's living at their house, and how cynically Dolokhov had praisedhis wife's beauty to him and from that time till they came to Moscow hadnot left them for a day."Yes, he is very handsome," thought Pierre, "and I know him. It would beparticularly pleasant to him to dishonor my name and ridicule me, justbecause I have exerted myself on his behalf, befriended him, and helpedhim. I know and understand what a spice that would add to the pleasureof deceiving me, if it really were true. Yes, if it were true, but I donot believe it. I have no right to, and can't, believe it." Heremembered the expression Dolokhov's face assumed in his moments ofcruelty, as when tying the policeman to the bear and dropping them intothe water, or when he challenged a man to a duel without any reason, orshot a post-boy's horse with a pistol. That expression was often onDolokhov's face when looking at him. "Yes, he is a bully," thoughtPierre, "to kill a man means nothing to him. It must seem to him thateveryone is afraid of him, and that must please him. He must think thatI, too, am afraid of him--and in fact I am afraid of him," he thought,and again he felt something terrible and monstrous rising in his soul.Dolokhov, Denisov, and Rostov were now sitting opposite Pierre andseemed very gay. Rostov was talking merrily to his two friends, one ofwhom was a dashing hussar and the other a notorious duelist and rake,and every now and then he glanced ironically at Pierre, whosepreoccupied, absent-minded, and massive figure was a very noticeable oneat the dinner. Rostov looked inimically at Pierre, first because Pierreappeared to his hussar eyes as a rich civilian, the husband of a beauty,and in a word--an old woman; and secondly because Pierre in hispreoccupation and absent-mindedness had not recognized Rostov and hadnot responded to his greeting. When the Emperor's health was drunk,Pierre, lost in thought, did not rise or lift his glass."What are you about?" shouted Rostov, looking at him in an ecstasy ofexasperation. "Don't you hear it's His Majesty the Emperor's health?"Pierre sighed, rose submissively, emptied his glass, and, waiting tillall were seated again, turned with his kindly smile to Rostov."Why, I didn't recognize you!" he said. But Rostov was otherwiseengaged; he was shouting "Hurrah!""Why don't you renew the acquaintance?" said Dolokhov to Rostov."Confound him, he's a fool!" said Rostov."One should make up to the husbands of pretty women," said Denisov.Pierre did not catch what they were saying, but knew they were talkingabout him. He reddened and turned away."Well, now to the health of handsome women!" said Dolokhov, and with aserious expression, but with a smile lurking at the corners of hismouth, he turned with his glass to Pierre."Here's to the health of lovely women, Peterkin--and their lovers!" headded.Pierre, with downcast eyes, drank out of his glass without looking atDolokhov or answering him. The footman, who was distributing leafletswith Kutuzov's cantata, laid one before Pierre as one of the principalguests. He was just going to take it when Dolokhov, leaning across,snatched it from his hand and began reading it. Pierre looked atDolokhov and his eyes dropped, the something terrible and monstrous thathad tormented him all dinnertime rose and took possession of him. Heleaned his whole massive body across the table."How dare you take it?" he shouted.Hearing that cry and seeing to whom it was addressed, Nesvitski and theneighbor on his right quickly turned in alarm to Bezukhov."Don't! Don't! What are you about?" whispered their frightened voices.Dolokhov looked at Pierre with clear, mirthful, cruel eyes, and thatsmile of his which seemed to say, "Ah! This is what I like!""You shan't have it!" he said distinctly.Pale, with quivering lips, Pierre snatched the copy."You...! you... scoundrel! I challenge you!" he ejaculated, and, pushingback his chair, he rose from the table.At the very instant he did this and uttered those words, Pierre feltthat the question of his wife's guilt which had been tormenting him thewhole day was finally and indubitably answered in the affirmative. Hehated her and was forever sundered from her. Despite Denisov's requestthat he would take no part in the matter, Rostov agreed to be Dolokhov'ssecond, and after dinner he discussed the arrangements for the duel withNesvitski, Bezukhov's second. Pierre went home, but Rostov with Dolokhovand Denisov stayed on at the club till late, listening to the gypsiesand other singers."Well then, till tomorrow at Sokolniki," said Dolokhov, as he took leaveof Rostov in the club porch."And do you feel quite calm?" Rostov asked.Dolokhov paused."Well, you see, I'll tell you the whole secret of dueling in two words.If you are going to fight a duel, and you make a will and writeaffectionate letters to your parents, and if you think you may bekilled, you are a fool and are lost for certain. But go with the firmintention of killing your man as quickly and surely as possible, andthen all will be right, as our bear huntsman at Kostroma used to tellme. 'Everyone fears a bear,' he says, 'but when you see one your fear'sall gone, and your only thought is not to let him get away!' And that'show it is with me. A demain, mon cher." ** Till tomorrow, my dear fellow.Next day, at eight in the morning, Pierre and Nesvitski drove to theSokolniki forest and found Dolokhov, Denisov, and Rostov already there.Pierre had the air of a man preoccupied with considerations which had noconnection with the matter in hand. His haggard face was yellow. He hadevidently not slept that night. He looked about distractedly and screwedup his eyes as if dazzled by the sun. He was entirely absorbed by twoconsiderations: his wife's guilt, of which after his sleepless night hehad not the slightest doubt, and the guiltlessness of Dolokhov, who hadno reason to preserve the honor of a man who was nothing to him.... "Ishould perhaps have done the same thing in his place," thought Pierre."It's even certain that I should have done the same, then why this duel,this murder? Either I shall kill him, or he will hit me in the head, orelbow, or knee. Can't I go away from here, run away, bury myselfsomewhere?" passed through his mind. But just at moments when suchthoughts occurred to him, he would ask in a particularly calm andabsent-minded way, which inspired the respect of the onlookers, "Will itbe long? Are things ready?"When all was ready, the sabers stuck in the snow to mark the barriers,and the pistols loaded, Nesvitski went up to Pierre."I should not be doing my duty, Count," he said in timid tones, "andshould not justify your confidence and the honor you have done me inchoosing me for your second, if at this grave, this very grave, moment Idid not tell you the whole truth. I think there is no sufficient groundfor this affair, or for blood to be shed over it.... You were not right,not quite in the right, you were impetuous...""Oh yes, it is horribly stupid," said Pierre."Then allow me to express your regrets, and I am sure your opponent willaccept them," said Nesvitski (who like the others concerned in theaffair, and like everyone in similar cases, did not yet believe that theaffair had come to an actual duel). "You know, Count, it is much morehonorable to admit one's mistake than to let matters become irreparable.There was no insult on either side. Allow me to convey....""No! What is there to talk about?" said Pierre. "It's all the same....Is everything ready?" he added. "Only tell me where to go and where toshoot," he said with an unnaturally gentle smile.He took the pistol in his hand and began asking about the working of thetrigger, as he had not before held a pistol in his hand--a fact that hedid not wish to confess."Oh yes, like that, I know, I only forgot," said he."No apologies, none whatever," said Dolokhov to Denisov (who on his sidehad been attempting a reconciliation), and he also went up to theappointed place.The spot chosen for the duel was some eighty paces from the road, wherethe sleighs had been left, in a small clearing in the pine forestcovered with melting snow, the frost having begun to break up during thelast few days. The antagonists stood forty paces apart at the fartheredge of the clearing. The seconds, measuring the paces, left tracks inthe deep wet snow between the place where they had been standing andNesvitski's and Dolokhov's sabers, which were stuck into the ground tenpaces apart to mark the barrier. It was thawing and misty; at fortypaces' distance nothing could be seen. For three minutes all had beenready, but they still delayed and all were silent.CHAPTER V"Well begin!" said Dolokhov."All right," said Pierre, still smiling in the same way. A feeling ofdread was in the air. It was evident that the affair so lightly beguncould no longer be averted but was taking its course independently ofmen's will.Denisov first went to the barrier and announced: "As the adve'sawieshave wefused a weconciliation, please pwoceed. Take your pistols, and atthe word thwee begin to advance."O-ne! T-wo! Thwee!" he shouted angrily and stepped aside.The combatants advanced along the trodden tracks, nearer and nearer toone another, beginning to see one another through the mist. They had theright to fire when they liked as they approached the barrier. Dolokhovwalked slowly without raising his pistol, looking intently with hisbright, sparkling blue eyes into his antagonist's face. His mouth woreits usual semblance of a smile."So I can fire when I like!" said Pierre, and at the word "three," hewent quickly forward, missing the trodden path and stepping into thedeep snow. He held the pistol in his right hand at arm's length,apparently afraid of shooting himself with it. His left hand he heldcarefully back, because he wished to support his right hand with it andknew he must not do so. Having advanced six paces and strayed off thetrack into the snow, Pierre looked down at his feet, then quicklyglanced at Dolokhov and, bending his finger as he had been shown, fired.Not at all expecting so loud a report, Pierre shuddered at the sound andthen, smiling at his own sensations, stood still. The smoke, rendereddenser by the mist, prevented him from seeing anything for an instant,but there was no second report as he had expected. He only heardDolokhov's hurried steps, and his figure came in view through the smoke.He was pressing one hand to his left side, while the other clutched hisdrooping pistol. His face was pale. Rostov ran toward him and saidsomething."No-o-o!" muttered Dolokhov through his teeth, "no, it's not over." Andafter stumbling a few staggering steps right up to the saber, he sank onthe snow beside it. His left hand was bloody; he wiped it on his coatand supported himself with it. His frowning face was pallid andquivered."Plea..." began Dolokhov, but could not at first pronounce the word."Please," he uttered with an effort.Pierre, hardly restraining his sobs, began running toward Dolokhov andwas about to cross the space between the barriers, when Dolokhov cried:"To your barrier!" and Pierre, grasping what was meant, stopped by hissaber. Only ten paces divided them. Dolokhov lowered his head to thesnow, greedily bit at it, again raised his head, adjusted himself, drewin his legs and sat up, seeking a firm center of gravity. He sucked andswallowed the cold snow, his lips quivered but his eyes, still smiling,glittered with effort and exasperation as he mustered his remainingstrength. He raised his pistol and aimed."Sideways! Cover yourself with your pistol!" ejaculated Nesvitski."Cover yourself!" even Denisov cried to his adversary.Pierre, with a gentle smile of pity and remorse, his arms and legshelplessly spread out, stood with his broad chest directly facingDolokhov looked sorrowfully at him. Denisov, Rostov, and Nesvitskiclosed their eyes. At the same instant they heard a report andDolokhov's angry cry."Missed!" shouted Dolokhov, and he lay helplessly, face downwards on thesnow.Pierre clutched his temples, and turning round went into the forest,trampling through the deep snow, and muttering incoherent words:"Folly... folly! Death... lies..." he repeated, puckering his face.Nesvitski stopped him and took him home.Rostov and Denisov drove away with the wounded Dolokhov.The latter lay silent in the sleigh with closed eyes and did not answera word to the questions addressed to him. But on entering Moscow hesuddenly came to and, lifting his head with an effort, took Rostov, whowas sitting beside him, by the hand. Rostov was struck by the totallyaltered and unexpectedly rapturous and tender expression on Dolokhov'sface."Well? How do you feel?" he asked."Bad! But it's not that, my friend-" said Dolokhov with a gasping voice."Where are we? In Moscow, I know. I don't matter, but I have killed her,killed... She won't get over it! She won't survive....""Who?" asked Rostov."My mother! My mother, my angel, my adored angel mother," and Dolokhovpressed Rostov's hand and burst into tears.When he had become a little quieter, he explained to Rostov that he wasliving with his mother, who, if she saw him dying, would not survive it.He implored Rostov to go on and prepare her.Rostov went on ahead to do what was asked, and to his great surpriselearned that Dolokhov the brawler, Dolokhov the bully, lived in Moscowwith an old mother and a hunchback sister, and was the most affectionateof sons and brothers.CHAPTER VIPierre had of late rarely seen his wife alone. Both in Petersburg and inMoscow their house was always full of visitors. The night after the duelhe did not go to his bedroom but, as he often did, remained in hisfather's room, that huge room in which Count Bezukhov had died.He lay down on the sofa meaning to fall asleep and forget all that hadhappened to him, but could not do so. Such a storm of feelings,thoughts, and memories suddenly arose within him that he could not fallasleep, nor even remain in one place, but had to jump up and pace theroom with rapid steps. Now he seemed to see her in the early days oftheir marriage, with bare shoulders and a languid, passionate look onher face, and then immediately he saw beside her Dolokhov's handsome,insolent, hard, and mocking face as he had seen it at the banquet, andthen that same face pale, quivering, and suffering, as it had been whenhe reeled and sank on the snow."What has happened?" he asked himself. "I have killed her lover, yes,killed my wife's lover. Yes, that was it! And why? How did I come to doit?"--"Because you married her," answered an inner voice."But in what was I to blame?" he asked. "In marrying her without lovingher; in deceiving yourself and her." And he vividly recalled that momentafter supper at Prince Vasili's, when he spoke those words he had foundso difficult to utter: "I love you." "It all comes from that! Even thenI felt it," he thought. "I felt then that it was not so, that I had noright to do it. And so it turns out."He remembered his honeymoon and blushed at the recollection.Particularly vivid, humiliating, and shameful was the recollection ofhow one day soon after his marriage he came out of the bedroom into hisstudy a little before noon in his silk dressing gown and found his headsteward there, who, bowing respectfully, looked into his face and at hisdressing gown and smiled slightly, as if expressing respectfulunderstanding of his employer's happiness."But how often I have felt proud of her, proud of her majestic beautyand social tact," thought he; "been proud of my house, in which shereceived all Petersburg, proud of her unapproachability and beauty. Sothis is what I was proud of! I then thought that I did not understandher. How often when considering her character I have told myself that Iwas to blame for not understanding her, for not understanding thatconstant composure and complacency and lack of all interests or desires,and the whole secret lies in the terrible truth that she is a depravedwoman. Now I have spoken that terrible word to myself all has becomeclear."Anatole used to come to borrow money from her and used to kiss hernaked shoulders. She did not give him the money, but let herself bekissed. Her father in jest tried to rouse her jealousy, and she repliedwith a calm smile that she was not so stupid as to be jealous: 'Let himdo what he pleases,' she used to say of me. One day I asked her if shefelt any symptoms of pregnancy. She laughed contemptuously and said shewas not a fool to want to have children, and that she was not going tohave any children by me."Then he recalled the coarseness and bluntness of her thoughts and thevulgarity of the expressions that were natural to her, though she hadbeen brought up in the most aristocratic circles."I'm not such a fool.... Just you try it on.... Allez-vous promener," *she used to say. Often seeing the success she had with young and old menand women Pierre could not understand why he did not love her.* "You clear out of this.""Yes, I never loved her," said he to himself; "I knew she was a depravedwoman," he repeated, "but dared not admit it to myself. And now there'sDolokhov sitting in the snow with a forced smile and perhaps dying,while meeting my remorse with some forced bravado!"Pierre was one of those people who, in spite of an appearance of what iscalled weak character, do not seek a confidant in their troubles. Hedigested his sufferings alone."It is all, all her fault," he said to himself; "but what of that? Whydid I bind myself to her? Why did I say 'Je vous aime' * to her, whichwas a lie, and worse than a lie? I am guilty and must endure... what? Aslur on my name? A misfortune for life? Oh, that's nonsense," hethought. "The slur on my name and honor--that's all apart from myself."* I love you."Louis XVI was executed because they said he was dishonorable and acriminal," came into Pierre's head, "and from their point of view theywere right, as were those too who canonized him and died a martyr'sdeath for his sake. Then Robespierre was beheaded for being a despot.Who is right and who is wrong? No one! But if you are alive--live:tomorrow you'll die as I might have died an hour ago. And is it worthtormenting oneself, when one has only a moment of life in comparisonwith eternity?"But at the moment when he imagined himself calmed by such reflections,she suddenly came into his mind as she was at the moments when he hadmost strongly expressed his insincere love for her, and he felt theblood rush to his heart and had again to get up and move about and breakand tear whatever came to his hand. "Why did I tell her that 'Je vousaime'?" he kept repeating to himself. And when he had said it for thetenth time, Moliere's words: "Mais que diable allait-il faire dans cettegalere?"* occurred to him, and he began to laugh at himself.* "But what the devil was he doing in that galley?"In the night he called his valet and told him to pack up to go toPetersburg. He could not imagine how he could speak to her now. Heresolved to go away next day and leave a letter informing her of hisintention to part from her forever.Next morning when the valet came into the room with his coffee, Pierrewas lying asleep on the ottoman with an open book in his hand.He woke up and looked round for a while with a startled expression,unable to realize where he was."The countess told me to inquire whether your excellency was at home,"said the valet.But before Pierre could decide what answer he would send, the countessherself in a white satin dressing gown embroidered with silver and withsimply dressed hair (two immense plaits twice round her lovely head likea coronet) entered the room, calm and majestic, except that there was awrathful wrinkle on her rather prominent marble brow. With herimperturbable calm she did not begin to speak in front of the valet. Sheknew of the duel and had come to speak about it. She waited till thevalet had set down the coffee things and left the room. Pierre looked ather timidly over his spectacles, and like a hare surrounded by houndswho lays back her ears and continues to crouch motionless before herenemies, he tried to continue reading. But feeling this to be senselessand impossible, he again glanced timidly at her. She did not sit downbut looked at him with a contemptuous smile, waiting for the valet togo."Well, what's this now? What have you been up to now, I should like toknow?" she asked sternly."I? What have I...?" stammered Pierre."So it seems you're a hero, eh? Come now, what was this duel about? Whatis it meant to prove? What? I ask you."Pierre turned over heavily on the ottoman and opened his mouth, butcould not reply."If you won't answer, I'll tell you..." Helene went on. "You believeeverything you're told. You were told..." Helene laughed, "that Dolokhovwas my lover," she said in French with her coarse plainness of speech,uttering the word amant as casually as any other word, "and you believedit! Well, what have you proved? What does this duel prove? That you're afool, que vous etes un sot, but everybody knew that. What will be theresult? That I shall be the laughingstock of all Moscow, that everyonewill say that you, drunk and not knowing what you were about, challengeda man you are jealous of without cause." Helene raised her voice andbecame more and more excited, "A man who's a better man than you inevery way...""Hm... Hm...!" growled Pierre, frowning without looking at her, and notmoving a muscle."And how could you believe he was my lover? Why? Because I like hiscompany? If you were cleverer and more agreeable, I should preferyours.""Don't speak to me... I beg you," muttered Pierre hoarsely."Why shouldn't I speak? I can speak as I like, and I tell you plainlythat there are not many wives with husbands such as you who would nothave taken lovers (des amants), but I have not done so," said she.Pierre wished to say something, looked at her with eyes whose strangeexpression she did not understand, and lay down again. He was sufferingphysically at that moment, there was a weight on his chest and he couldnot breathe. He knew that he must do something to put an end to thissuffering, but what he wanted to do was too terrible."We had better separate," he muttered in a broken voice."Separate? Very well, but only if you give me a fortune," said Helene."Separate! That's a thing to frighten me with!"Pierre leaped up from the sofa and rushed staggering toward her."I'll kill you!" he shouted, and seizing the marble top of a table witha strength he had never before felt, he made a step toward herbrandishing the slab.Helene's face became terrible, she shrieked and sprang aside. Hisfather's nature showed itself in Pierre. He felt the fascination anddelight of frenzy. He flung down the slab, broke it, and swooping downon her with outstretched hands shouted, "Get out!" in such a terriblevoice that the whole house heard it with horror. God knows what he wouldhave done at that moment had Helene not fled from the room.A week later Pierre gave his wife full power to control all his estatesin Great Russia, which formed the larger part of his property, and leftfor Petersburg alone.CHAPTER VIITwo months had elapsed since the news of the battle of Austerlitz andthe loss of Prince Andrew had reached Bald Hills, and in spite of theletters sent through the embassy and all the searches made, his body hadnot been found nor was he on the list of prisoners. What was worst ofall for his relations was the fact that there was still a possibility ofhis having been picked up on the battlefield by the people of the placeand that he might now be lying, recovering or dying, alone amongstrangers and unable to send news of himself. The gazettes from whichthe old prince first heard of the defeat at Austerlitz stated, as usualvery briefly and vaguely, that after brilliant engagements the Russianshad had to retreat and had made their withdrawal in perfect order. Theold prince understood from this official report that our army had beendefeated. A week after the gazette report of the battle of Austerlitzcame a letter from Kutuzov informing the prince of the fate that hadbefallen his son."Your son," wrote Kutuzov, "fell before my eyes, a standard in his handand at the head of a regiment--he fell as a hero, worthy of his fatherand his fatherland. To the great regret of myself and of the whole armyit is still uncertain whether he is alive or not. I comfort myself andyou with the hope that your son is alive, for otherwise he would havebeen mentioned among the officers found on the field of battle, a listof whom has been sent me under flag of truce."After receiving this news late in the evening, when he was alone in hisstudy, the old prince went for his walk as usual next morning, but hewas silent with his steward, the gardener, and the architect, and thoughhe looked very grim he said nothing to anyone.When Princess Mary went to him at the usual hour he was working at hislathe and, as usual, did not look round at her."Ah, Princess Mary!" he said suddenly in an unnatural voice, throwingdown his chisel. (The wheel continued to revolve by its own impetus, andPrincess Mary long remembered the dying creak of that wheel, whichmerged in her memory with what followed.)She approached him, saw his face, and something gave way within her. Hereyes grew dim. By the expression of her father's face, not sad, notcrushed, but angry and working unnaturally, she saw that hanging overher and about to crush her was some terrible misfortune, the worst inlife, one she had not yet experienced, irreparable and incomprehensible--the death of one she loved."Father! Andrew!"--said the ungraceful, awkward princess with such anindescribable charm of sorrow and self-forgetfulness that her fathercould not bear her look but turned away with a sob."Bad news! He's not among the prisoners nor among the killed! Kutuzovwrites..." and he screamed as piercingly as if he wished to drive theprincess away by that scream... "Killed!"The princess did not fall down or faint. She was already pale, but onhearing these words her face changed and something brightened in herbeautiful, radiant eyes. It was as if joy--a supreme joy apart from thejoys and sorrows of this world--overflowed the great grief within her.She forgot all fear of her father, went up to him, took his hand, anddrawing him down put her arm round his thin, scraggy neck."Father," she said, "do not turn away from me, let us weep together.""Scoundrels! Blackguards!" shrieked the old man, turning his face awayfrom her. "Destroying the army, destroying the men! And why? Go, go andtell Lise."The princess sank helplessly into an armchair beside her father andwept. She saw her brother now as he had been at the moment when he tookleave of her and of Lise, his look tender yet proud. She saw him tenderand amused as he was when he put on the little icon. "Did he believe?Had he repented of his unbelief? Was he now there? There in the realmsof eternal peace and blessedness?" she thought."Father, tell me how it happened," she asked through her tears."Go! Go! Killed in battle, where the best of Russian men and Russia'sglory were led to destruction. Go, Princess Mary. Go and tell Lise. Iwill follow."When Princess Mary returned from her father, the little princess satworking and looked up with that curious expression of inner, happy calmpeculiar to pregnant women. It was evident that her eyes did not seePrincess Mary but were looking within... into herself... at somethingjoyful and mysterious taking place within her."Mary," she said, moving away from the embroidery frame and lying back,"give me your hand." She took her sister-in-law's hand and held it belowher waist.Her eyes were smiling expectantly, her downy lip rose and remainedlifted in childlike happiness.Princess Mary knelt down before her and hid her face in the folds of hersister-in-law's dress."There, there! Do you feel it? I feel so strange. And do you know, Mary,I am going to love him very much," said Lise, looking with bright andhappy eyes at her sister-in-law.Princess Mary could not lift her head, she was weeping."What is the matter, Mary?""Nothing... only I feel sad... sad about Andrew," she said, wiping awayher tears on her sister-in-law's knee.Several times in the course of the morning Princess Mary began trying toprepare her sister-in-law, and every time began to cry. Unobservant aswas the little princess, these tears, the cause of which she did notunderstand, agitated her. She said nothing but looked about uneasily asif in search of something. Before dinner the old prince, of whom she wasalways afraid, came into her room with a peculiarly restless and malignexpression and went out again without saying a word. She looked atPrincess Mary, then sat thinking for a while with that expression ofattention to something within her that is only seen in pregnant women,and suddenly began to cry."Has anything come from Andrew?" she asked."No, you know it's too soon for news. But my father is anxious and Ifeel afraid.""So there's nothing?""Nothing," answered Princess Mary, looking firmly with her radiant eyesat her sister-in-law.She had determined not to tell her and persuaded her father to hide theterrible news from her till after her confinement, which was expectedwithin a few days. Princess Mary and the old prince each bore and hidtheir grief in their own way. The old prince would not cherish any hope:he made up his mind that Prince Andrew had been killed, and though hesent an official to Austria to seek for traces of his son, he ordered amonument from Moscow which he intended to erect in his own garden to hismemory, and he told everybody that his son had been killed. He tried notto change his former way of life, but his strength failed him. He walkedless, ate less, slept less, and became weaker every day. Princess Maryhoped. She prayed for her brother as living and was always awaiting newsof his return.CHAPTER VIII"Dearest," said the little princess after breakfast on the morning ofthe nineteenth March, and her downy little lip rose from old habit, butas sorrow was manifest in every smile, the sound of every word, and evenevery footstep in that house since the terrible news had come, so nowthe smile of the little princess--influenced by the general mood thoughwithout knowing its cause--was such as to remind one still more of thegeneral sorrow."Dearest, I'm afraid this morning's fruschtique *--as Foka the cookcalls it--has disagreed with me."* Fruhstuck: breakfast."What is the matter with you, my darling? You look pale. Oh, you arevery pale!" said Princess Mary in alarm, running with her soft,ponderous steps up to her sister-in-law."Your excellency, should not Mary Bogdanovna be sent for?" said one ofthe maids who was present. (Mary Bogdanovna was a midwife from theneighboring town, who had been at Bald Hills for the last fortnight.)"Oh yes," assented Princess Mary, "perhaps that's it. I'll go. Courage,my angel." She kissed Lise and was about to leave the room."Oh, no, no!" And besides the pallor and the physical suffering on thelittle princess' face, an expression of childish fear of inevitable painshowed itself."No, it's only indigestion?... Say it's only indigestion, say so, Mary!Say..." And the little princess began to cry capriciously like asuffering child and to wring her little hands even with someaffectation. Princess Mary ran out of the room to fetch Mary Bogdanovna."Mon Dieu! Mon Dieu! Oh!" she heard as she left the room.The midwife was already on her way to meet her, rubbing her small, plumpwhite hands with an air of calm importance."Mary Bogdanovna, I think it's beginning!" said Princess Mary looking atthe midwife with wide-open eyes of alarm."Well, the Lord be thanked, Princess," said Mary Bogdanovna, nothastening her steps. "You young ladies should not know anything aboutit.""But how is it the doctor from Moscow is not here yet?" said theprincess. (In accordance with Lise's and Prince Andrew's wishes they hadsent in good time to Moscow for a doctor and were expecting him at anymoment.)"No matter, Princess, don't be alarmed," said Mary Bogdanovna. "We'llmanage very well without a doctor."Five minutes later Princess Mary from her room heard something heavybeing carried by. She looked out. The men servants were carrying thelarge leather sofa from Prince Andrew's study into the bedroom. On theirfaces was a quiet and solemn look.Princess Mary sat alone in her room listening to the sounds in thehouse, now and then opening her door when someone passed and watchingwhat was going on in the passage. Some women passing with quiet steps inand out of the bedroom glanced at the princess and turned away. She didnot venture to ask any questions, and shut the door again, now sittingdown in her easy chair, now taking her prayer book, now kneeling beforethe icon stand. To her surprise and distress she found that her prayersdid not calm her excitement. Suddenly her door opened softly and her oldnurse, Praskovya Savishna, who hardly ever came to that room as the oldprince had forbidden it, appeared on the threshold with a shawl roundher head."I've come to sit with you a bit, Masha," said the nurse, "and here I'vebrought the prince's wedding candles to light before his saint, myangel," she said with a sigh."Oh, nurse, I'm so glad!""God is merciful, birdie."The nurse lit the gilt candles before the icons and sat down by the doorwith her knitting. Princess Mary took a book and began reading. Onlywhen footsteps or voices were heard did they look at one another, theprincess anxious and inquiring, the nurse encouraging. Everyone in thehouse was dominated by the same feeling that Princess Mary experiencedas she sat in her room. But owing to the superstition that the fewer thepeople who know of it the less a woman in travail suffers, everyonetried to pretend not to know; no one spoke of it, but apart from theordinary staid and respectful good manners habitual in the prince'shousehold, a common anxiety, a softening of the heart, and aconsciousness that something great and mysterious was being accomplishedat that moment made itself felt.There was no laughter in the maids' large hall. In the men servants'hall all sat waiting, silently and alert. In the outlying serfs'quarters torches and candles were burning and no one slept. The oldprince, stepping on his heels, paced up and down his study and sentTikhon to ask Mary Bogdanovna what news.--"Say only that 'the princetold me to ask,' and come and tell me her answer.""Inform the prince that labor has begun," said Mary Bogdanovna, givingthe messenger a significant look.Tikhon went and told the prince."Very good!" said the prince closing the door behind him, and Tikhon didnot hear the slightest sound from the study after that.After a while he re-entered it as if to snuff the candles, and, seeingthe prince was lying on the sofa, looked at him, noticed his perturbedface, shook his head, and going up to him silently kissed him on theshoulder and left the room without snuffing the candles or saying why hehad entered. The most solemn mystery in the world continued its course.Evening passed, night came, and the feeling of suspense and softening ofheart in the presence of the unfathomable did not lessen but increased.No one slept.It was one of those March nights when winter seems to wish to resume itssway and scatters its last snows and storms with desperate fury. A relayof horses had been sent up the highroad to meet the German doctor fromMoscow who was expected every moment, and men on horseback with lanternswere sent to the crossroads to guide him over the country road with itshollows and snow-covered pools of water.Princess Mary had long since put aside her book: she sat silent, herluminous eyes fixed on her nurse's wrinkled face (every line of whichshe knew so well), on the lock of gray hair that escaped from under thekerchief, and the loose skin that hung under her chin.Nurse Savishna, knitting in hand, was telling in low tones, scarcelyhearing or understanding her own words, what she had told hundreds oftimes before: how the late princess had given birth to Princess Mary inKishenev with only a Moldavian peasant woman to help instead of amidwife."God is merciful, doctors are never needed," she said.Suddenly a gust of wind beat violently against the casement of thewindow, from which the double frame had been removed (by order of theprince, one window frame was removed in each room as soon as the larksreturned), and, forcing open a loosely closed latch, set the damaskcurtain flapping and blew out the candle with its chill, snowy draft.Princess Mary shuddered; her nurse, putting down the stocking she wasknitting, went to the window and leaning out tried to catch the opencasement. The cold wind flapped the ends of her kerchief and her looselocks of gray hair."Princess, my dear, there's someone driving up the avenue!" she said,holding the casement and not closing it. "With lanterns. Most likely thedoctor.""Oh, my God! thank God!" said Princess Mary. "I must go and meet him, hedoes not know Russian."Princess Mary threw a shawl over her head and ran to meet the newcomer.As she was crossing the anteroom she saw through the window a carriagewith lanterns, standing at the entrance. She went out on the stairs. Ona banister post stood a tallow candle which guttered in the draft. Onthe landing below, Philip, the footman, stood looking scared and holdinganother candle. Still lower, beyond the turn of the staircase, one couldhear the footstep of someone in thick felt boots, and a voice thatseemed familiar to Princess Mary was saying something."Thank God!" said the voice. "And Father?""Gone to bed," replied the voice of Demyan the house steward, who wasdownstairs.Then the voice said something more, Demyan replied, and the steps in thefelt boots approached the unseen bend of the staircase more rapidly."It's Andrew!" thought Princess Mary. "No it can't be, that would be tooextraordinary," and at the very moment she thought this, the face andfigure of Prince Andrew, in a fur cloak the deep collar of which coveredwith snow, appeared on the landing where the footman stood with thecandle. Yes, it was he, pale, thin, with a changed and strangelysoftened but agitated expression on his face. He came up the stairs andembraced his sister."You did not get my letter?" he asked, and not waiting for a reply--which he would not have received, for the princess was unable to speak--he turned back, rapidly mounted the stairs again with the doctor who hadentered the hall after him (they had met at the last post station), andagain embraced his sister."What a strange fate, Masha darling!" And having taken off his cloak andfelt boots, he went to the little princess' apartment.CHAPTER IXThe little princess lay supported by pillows, with a white cap on herhead (the pains had just left her). Strands of her black hair lay roundher inflamed and perspiring cheeks, her charming rosy mouth with itsdowny lip was open and she was smiling joyfully. Prince Andrew enteredand paused facing her at the foot of the sofa on which she was lying.Her glittering eyes, filled with childlike fear and excitement, restedon him without changing their expression. "I love you all and have doneno harm to anyone; why must I suffer so? Help me!" her look seemed tosay. She saw her husband, but did not realize the significance of hisappearance before her now. Prince Andrew went round the sofa and kissedher forehead."My darling!" he said--a word he had never used to her before. "God ismerciful...."She looked at him inquiringly and with childlike reproach."I expected help from you and I get none, none from you either!" saidher eyes. She was not surprised at his having come; she did not realizethat he had come. His coming had nothing to do with her sufferings orwith their relief. The pangs began again and Mary Bogdanovna advisedPrince Andrew to leave the room.The doctor entered. Prince Andrew went out and, meeting Princess Mary,again joined her. They began talking in whispers, but their talk brokeoff at every moment. They waited and listened."Go, dear," said Princess Mary.Prince Andrew went again to his wife and sat waiting in the room next tohers. A woman came from the bedroom with a frightened face and becameconfused when she saw Prince Andrew. He covered his face with his handsand remained so for some minutes. Piteous, helpless, animal moans camethrough the door. Prince Andrew got up, went to the door, and tried toopen it. Someone was holding it shut."You can't come in! You can't!" said a terrified voice from within.He began pacing the room. The screaming ceased, and a few more secondswent by. Then suddenly a terrible shriek--it could not be hers, shecould not scream like that--came from the bedroom. Prince Andrew ran tothe door; the scream ceased and he heard the wail of an infant."What have they taken a baby in there for?" thought Prince Andrew in thefirst second. "A baby? What baby...? Why is there a baby there? Or isthe baby born?"Then suddenly he realized the joyful significance of that wail; tearschoked him, and leaning his elbows on the window sill be began to cry,sobbing like a child. The door opened. The doctor with his shirt sleevestucked up, without a coat, pale and with a trembling jaw, came out ofthe room. Prince Andrew turned to him, but the doctor gave him abewildered look and passed by without a word. A woman rushed out andseeing Prince Andrew stopped, hesitating on the threshold. He went intohis wife's room. She was lying dead, in the same position he had seenher in five minutes before and, despite the fixed eyes and the pallor ofthe cheeks, the same expression was on her charming childlike face withits upper lip covered with tiny black hair."I love you all, and have done no harm to anyone; and what have you doneto me?"--said her charming, pathetic, dead face.In a corner of the room something red and tiny gave a grunt and squealedin Mary Bogdanovna's trembling white hands.Two hours later Prince Andrew, stepping softly, went into his father'sroom. The old man already knew everything. He was standing close to thedoor and as soon as it opened his rough old arms closed like a viseround his son's neck, and without a word he began to sob like a child.Three days later the little princess was buried, and Prince Andrew wentup the steps to where the coffin stood, to give her the farewell kiss.And there in the coffin was the same face, though with closed eyes. "Ah,what have you done to me?" it still seemed to say, and Prince Andrewfelt that something gave way in his soul and that he was guilty of a sinhe could neither remedy nor forget. He could not weep. The old man toocame up and kissed the waxen little hands that lay quietly crossed oneon the other on her breast, and to him, too, her face seemed to say:"Ah, what have you done to me, and why?" And at the sight the old manturned angrily away.Another five days passed, and then the young Prince Nicholas Andreevichwas baptized. The wet nurse supported the coverlet with her chin, whilethe priest with a goose feather anointed the boy's little red andwrinkled soles and palms.His grandfather, who was his godfather, trembling and afraid of droppinghim, carried the infant round the battered tin font and handed him overto the godmother, Princess Mary. Prince Andrew sat in another room,faint with fear lest the baby should be drowned in the font, and awaitedthe termination of the ceremony. He looked up joyfully at the baby whenthe nurse brought it to him and nodded approval when she told him thatthe wax with the baby's hair had not sunk in the font but had floated.CHAPTER XRostov's share in Dolokhov's duel with Bezukhov was hushed up by theefforts of the old count, and instead of being degraded to the ranks ashe expected he was appointed an adjutant to the governor general ofMoscow. As a result he could not go to the country with the rest of thefamily, but was kept all summer in Moscow by his new duties. Dolokhovrecovered, and Rostov became very friendly with him during hisconvalescence. Dolokhov lay ill at his mother's who loved himpassionately and tenderly, and old Mary Ivanovna, who had grown fond ofRostov for his friendship to her Fedya, often talked to him about herson."Yes, Count," she would say, "he is too noble and pure-souled for ourpresent, depraved world. No one now loves virtue; it seems like areproach to everyone. Now tell me, Count, was it right, was ithonorable, of Bezukhov? And Fedya, with his noble spirit, loved him andeven now never says a word against him. Those pranks in Petersburg whenthey played some tricks on a policeman, didn't they do it together? Andthere! Bezukhov got off scotfree, while Fedya had to bear the wholeburden on his shoulders. Fancy what he had to go through! It's true hehas been reinstated, but how could they fail to do that? I think therewere not many such gallant sons of the fatherland out there as he. Andnow--this duel! Have these people no feeling, or honor? Knowing him tobe an only son, to challenge him and shoot so straight! It's well Godhad mercy on us. And what was it for? Who doesn't have intriguesnowadays? Why, if he was so jealous, as I see things he should haveshown it sooner, but he lets it go on for months. And then to call himout, reckoning on Fedya not fighting because he owed him money! Whatbaseness! What meanness! I know you understand Fedya, my dear count;that, believe me, is why I am so fond of you. Few people do understandhim. He is such a lofty, heavenly soul!"Dolokhov himself during his convalescence spoke to Rostov in a way noone would have expected of him."I know people consider me a bad man!" he said. "Let them! I don't carea straw about anyone but those I love; but those I love, I love so thatI would give my life for them, and the others I'd throttle if they stoodin my way. I have an adored, a priceless mother, and two or threefriends--you among them--and as for the rest I only care about them inso far as they are harmful or useful. And most of them are harmful,especially the women. Yes, dear boy," he continued, "I have met loving,noble, high-minded men, but I have not yet met any women--countesses orcooks--who were not venal. I have not yet met that divine purity anddevotion I look for in women. If I found such a one I'd give my life forher! But those!..." and he made a gesture of contempt. "And believe me,if I still value my life it is only because I still hope to meet such adivine creature, who will regenerate, purify, and elevate me. But youdon't understand it.""Oh, yes, I quite understand," answered Rostov, who was under his newfriend's influence.In the autumn the Rostovs returned to Moscow. Early in the winterDenisov also came back and stayed with them. The first half of thewinter of 1806, which Nicholas Rostov spent in Moscow, was one of thehappiest, merriest times for him and the whole family. Nicholas broughtmany young men to his parents' house. Vera was a handsome girl oftwenty; Sonya a girl of sixteen with all the charm of an opening flower;Natasha, half grown up and half child, was now childishly amusing, nowgirlishly enchanting.At that time in the Rostovs' house there prevailed an amorous atmospherecharacteristic of homes where there are very young and very charminggirls. Every young man who came to the house--seeing thoseimpressionable, smiling young faces (smiling probably at their ownhappiness), feeling the eager bustle around him, and hearing the fitfulbursts of song and music and the inconsequent but friendly prattle ofyoung girls ready for anything and full of hope--experienced the samefeeling; sharing with the young folk of the Rostovs' household areadiness to fall in love and an expectation of happiness.Among the young men introduced by Rostov one of the first was Dolokhov,whom everyone in the house liked except Natasha. She almost quarreledwith her brother about him. She insisted that he was a bad man, and thatin the duel with Bezukhov, Pierre was right and Dolokhov wrong, andfurther that he was disagreeable and unnatural."There's nothing for me to understand," she cried out with resoluteself-will, "he is wicked and heartless. There now, I like your Denisovthough he is a rake and all that, still I like him; so you see I dounderstand. I don't know how to put it... with this one everything iscalculated, and I don't like that. But Denisov...""Oh, Denisov is quite different," replied Nicholas, implying that evenDenisov was nothing compared to Dolokhov--"you must understand what asoul there is in Dolokhov, you should see him with his mother. What aheart!""Well, I don't know about that, but I am uncomfortable with him. And doyou know he has fallen in love with Sonya?""What nonsense...""I'm certain of it; you'll see."Natasha's prediction proved true. Dolokhov, who did not usually care forthe society of ladies, began to come often to the house, and thequestion for whose sake he came (though no one spoke of it) was soonsettled. He came because of Sonya. And Sonya, though she would neverhave dared to say so, knew it and blushed scarlet every time Dolokhovappeared.Dolokhov often dined at the Rostovs', never missed a performance atwhich they were present, and went to Iogel's balls for young peoplewhich the Rostovs always attended. He was pointedly attentive to Sonyaand looked at her in such a way that not only could she not bear hisglances without coloring, but even the old countess and Natasha blushedwhen they saw his looks.It was evident that this strange, strong man was under the irresistibleinfluence of the dark, graceful girl who loved another.Rostov noticed something new in Dolokhov's relations with Sonya, but hedid not explain to himself what these new relations were. "They'realways in love with someone," he thought of Sonya and Natasha. But hewas not as much at ease with Sonya and Dolokhov as before and was lessfrequently at home.In the autumn of 1806 everybody had again begun talking of the war withNapoleon with even greater warmth than the year before. Orders weregiven to raise recruits, ten men in every thousand for the regular army,and besides this, nine men in every thousand for the militia. EverywhereBonaparte was anathematized and in Moscow nothing but the coming war wastalked of. For the Rostov family the whole interest of thesepreparations for war lay in the fact that Nicholas would not hear ofremaining in Moscow, and only awaited the termination of Denisov'sfurlough after Christmas to return with him to their regiment. Hisapproaching departure did not prevent his amusing himself, but rathergave zest to his pleasures. He spent the greater part of his time awayfrom home, at dinners, parties, and balls.CHAPTER XIOn the third day after Christmas Nicholas dined at home, a thing he hadrarely done of late. It was a grand farewell dinner, as he and Denisovwere leaving to join their regiment after Epiphany. About twenty peoplewere present, including Dolokhov and Denisov.Never had love been so much in the air, and never had the amorousatmosphere made itself so strongly felt in the Rostovs' house as at thisholiday time. "Seize the moments of happiness, love and be loved! Thatis the only reality in the world, all else is folly. It is the one thingwe are interested in here," said the spirit of the place.Nicholas, having as usual exhausted two pairs of horses, withoutvisiting all the places he meant to go to and where he had been invited,returned home just before dinner. As soon as he entered he noticed andfelt the tension of the amorous air in the house, and also noticed acurious embarrassment among some of those present. Sonya, Dolokhov, andthe old countess were especially disturbed, and to a lesser degreeNatasha. Nicholas understood that something must have happened betweenSonya and Dolokhov before dinner, and with the kindly sensitivenessnatural to him was very gentle and wary with them both at dinner. Onthat same evening there was to be one of the balls that Iogel (thedancing master) gave for his pupils during the holidays."Nicholas, will you come to Iogel's? Please do!" said Natasha. "He askedyou, and Vasili Dmitrich * is also going."* Denisov."Where would I not go at the countess' command!" said Denisov, who atthe Rostovs' had jocularly assumed the role of Natasha's knight. "I'meven weady to dance the pas de chale.""If I have time," answered Nicholas. "But I promised the Arkharovs; theyhave a party.""And you?" he asked Dolokhov, but as soon as he had asked the questionhe noticed that it should not have been put."Perhaps," coldly and angrily replied Dolokhov, glancing at Sonya, and,scowling, he gave Nicholas just such a look as he had given Pierre atthe club dinner."There is something up," thought Nicholas, and he was further confirmedin this conclusion by the fact that Dolokhov left immediately afterdinner. He called Natasha and asked her what was the matter."And I was looking for you," said Natasha running out to him. "I toldyou, but you would not believe it," she said triumphantly. "He hasproposed to Sonya!"Little as Nicholas had occupied himself with Sonya of late, somethingseemed to give way within him at this news. Dolokhov was a suitable andin some respects a brilliant match for the dowerless, orphan girl. Fromthe point of view of the old countess and of society it was out of thequestion for her to refuse him. And therefore Nicholas' first feeling onhearing the news was one of anger with Sonya.... He tried to say,"That's capital; of course she'll forget her childish promises andaccept the offer," but before he had time to say it Natasha began again."And fancy! she refused him quite definitely!" adding, after a pause,"she told him she loved another.""Yes, my Sonya could not have done otherwise!" thought Nicholas."Much as Mamma pressed her, she refused, and I know she won't changeonce she has said...""And Mamma pressed her!" said Nicholas reproachfully."Yes," said Natasha. "Do you know, Nicholas--don't be angry--but I knowyou will not marry her. I know, heaven knows how, but I know for certainthat you won't marry her.""Now you don't know that at all!" said Nicholas. "But I must talk toher. What a darling Sonya is!" he added with a smile."Ah, she is indeed a darling! I'll send her to you."And Natasha kissed her brother and ran away.A minute later Sonya came in with a frightened, guilty, and scared look.Nicholas went up to her and kissed her hand. This was the first timesince his return that they had talked alone and about their love."Sophie," he began, timidly at first and then more and more boldly, "ifyou wish to refuse one who is not only a brilliant and advantageousmatch but a splendid, noble fellow... he is my friend..."Sonya interrupted him."I have already refused," she said hurriedly."If you are refusing for my sake, I am afraid that I..."Sonya again interrupted. She gave him an imploring, frightened look."Nicholas, don't tell me that!" she said."No, but I must. It may be arrogant of me, but still it is best to sayit. If you refuse him on my account, I must tell you the whole truth. Ilove you, and I think I love you more than anyone else....""That is enough for me," said Sonya, blushing."No, but I have been in love a thousand times and shall fall in loveagain, though for no one have I such a feeling of friendship,confidence, and love as I have for you. Then I am young. Mamma does notwish it. In a word, I make no promise. And I beg you to considerDolokhov's offer," he said, articulating his friend's name withdifficulty."Don't say that to me! I want nothing. I love you as a brother andalways shall, and I want nothing more.""You are an angel: I am not worthy of you, but I am afraid of misleadingyou."And Nicholas again kissed her hand.CHAPTER XIIIogel's were the most enjoyable balls in Moscow. So said the mothers asthey watched their young people executing their newly learned steps, andso said the youths and maidens themselves as they danced till they wereready to drop, and so said the grown-up young men and women who came tothese balls with an air of condescension and found them most enjoyable.That year two marriages had come of these balls. The two pretty youngPrincesses Gorchakov met suitors there and were married and so furtherincreased the fame of these dances. What distinguished them from otherswas the absence of host or hostess and the presence of the good-naturedIogel, flying about like a feather and bowing according to the rules ofhis art, as he collected the tickets from all his visitors. There wasthe fact that only those came who wished to dance and amuse themselvesas girls of thirteen and fourteen do who are wearing long dresses forthe first time. With scarcely any exceptions they all were, or seemed tobe, pretty--so rapturous were their smiles and so sparkling their eyes.Sometimes the best of the pupils, of whom Natasha, who was exceptionallygraceful, was first, even danced the pas de chale, but at this last ballonly the ecossaise, the anglaise, and the mazurka, which was just cominginto fashion, were danced. Iogel had taken a ballroom in Bezukhov'shouse, and the ball, as everyone said, was a great success. There weremany pretty girls and the Rostov girls were among the prettiest. Theywere both particularly happy and gay. That evening, proud of Dolokhov'sproposal, her refusal, and her explanation with Nicholas, Sonya twirledabout before she left home so that the maid could hardly get her hairplaited, and she was transparently radiant with impulsive joy.Natasha no less proud of her first long dress and of being at a realball was even happier. They were both dressed in white muslin with pinkribbons.Natasha fell in love the very moment she entered the ballroom. She wasnot in love with anyone in particular, but with everyone. Whateverperson she happened to look at she was in love with for that moment."Oh, how delightful it is!" she kept saying, running up to Sonya.Nicholas and Denisov were walking up and down, looking with kindlypatronage at the dancers."How sweet she is--she will be a weal beauty!" said Denisov."Who?""Countess Natasha," answered Denisov."And how she dances! What gwace!" he said again after a pause."Who are you talking about?""About your sister," ejaculated Denisov testily.Rostov smiled."My dear count, you were one of my best pupils--you must dance," saidlittle Iogel coming up to Nicholas. "Look how many charming youngladies-" He turned with the same request to Denisov who was also aformer pupil of his."No, my dear fellow, I'll be a wallflower," said Denisov. "Don't youwecollect what bad use I made of your lessons?""Oh no!" said Iogel, hastening to reassure him. "You were onlyinattentive, but you had talent--oh yes, you had talent!"The band struck up the newly introduced mazurka. Nicholas could notrefuse Iogel and asked Sonya to dance. Denisov sat down by the oldladies and, leaning on his saber and beating time with his foot, toldthem something funny and kept them amused, while he watched the youngpeople dancing, Iogel with Natasha, his pride and his best pupil, werethe first couple. Noiselessly, skillfully stepping with his little feetin low shoes, Iogel flew first across the hall with Natasha, who, thoughshy, went on carefully executing her steps. Denisov did not take hiseyes off her and beat time with his saber in a way that clearlyindicated that if he was not dancing it was because he would not and notbecause he could not. In the middle of a figure he beckoned to Rostovwho was passing:"This is not at all the thing," he said. "What sort of Polish mazuwka isthis? But she does dance splendidly."Knowing that Denisov had a reputation even in Poland for the masterlyway in which he danced the mazurka, Nicholas ran up to Natasha:"Go and choose Denisov. He is a real dancer, a wonder!" he said.When it came to Natasha's turn to choose a partner, she rose and,tripping rapidly across in her little shoes trimmed with bows, rantimidly to the corner where Denisov sat. She saw that everybody waslooking at her and waiting. Nicholas saw that Denisov was refusingthough he smiled delightedly. He ran up to them."Please, Vasili Dmitrich," Natasha was saying, "do come!""Oh no, let me off, Countess," Denisov replied."Now then, Vaska," said Nicholas."They coax me as if I were Vaska the cat!" said Denisov jokingly."I'll sing for you a whole evening," said Natasha."Oh, the faiwy! She can do anything with me!" said Denisov, and heunhooked his saber. He came out from behind the chairs, clasped hispartner's hand firmly, threw back his head, and advanced his foot,waiting for the beat. Only on horse back and in the mazurka wasDenisov's short stature not noticeable and he looked the fine fellow hefelt himself to be. At the right beat of the music he looked sideways athis partner with a merry and triumphant air, suddenly stamped with onefoot, bounded from the floor like a ball, and flew round the room takinghis partner with him. He glided silently on one foot half across theroom, and seeming not to notice the chairs was dashing straight at them,when suddenly, clinking his spurs and spreading out his legs, he stoppedshort on his heels, stood so a second, stamped on the spot clanking hisspurs, whirled rapidly round, and, striking his left heel against hisright, flew round again in a circle. Natasha guessed what he meant todo, and abandoning herself to him followed his lead hardly knowing how.First he spun her round, holding her now with his left, now with hisright hand, then falling on one knee he twirled her round him, and againjumping up, dashed so impetuously forward that it seemed as if he wouldrush through the whole suite of rooms without drawing breath, and thenhe suddenly stopped and performed some new and unexpected steps. When atlast, smartly whirling his partner round in front of her chair, he drewup with a click of his spurs and bowed to her, Natasha did not even makehim a curtsy. She fixed her eyes on him in amazement, smiling as if shedid not recognize him."What does this mean?" she brought out.Although Iogel did not acknowledge this to be the real mazurka, everyonewas delighted with Denisov's skill, he was asked again and again as apartner, and the old men began smilingly to talk about Poland and thegood old days. Denisov, flushed after the mazurka and mopping himselfwith his handkerchief, sat down by Natasha and did not leave her for therest of the evening.CHAPTER XIIIFor two days after that Rostov did not see Dolokhov at his own or atDolokhov's home: on the third day he received a note from him:As I do not intend to be at your house again for reasons you know of,and am going to rejoin my regiment, I am giving a farewell suppertonight to my friends--come to the English Hotel.About ten o'clock Rostov went to the English Hotel straight from thetheater, where he had been with his family and Denisov. He was at onceshown to the best room, which Dolokhov had taken for that evening. Sometwenty men were gathered round a table at which Dolokhov sat between twocandles. On the table was a pile of gold and paper money, and he waskeeping the bank. Rostov had not seen him since his proposal and Sonya'srefusal and felt uncomfortable at the thought of how they would meet.Dolokhov's clear, cold glance met Rostov as soon as he entered the door,as though he had long expected him."It's a long time since we met," he said. "Thanks for coming. I'll justfinish dealing, and then Ilyushka will come with his chorus.""I called once or twice at your house," said Rostov, reddening.Dolokhov made no reply."You may punt," he said.Rostov recalled at that moment a strange conversation he had once hadwith Dolokhov. "None but fools trust to luck in play," Dolokhov had thensaid."Or are you afraid to play with me?" Dolokhov now asked as if guessingRostov's thought.Beneath his smile Rostov saw in him the mood he had shown at the clubdinner and at other times, when as if tired of everyday life he had felta need to escape from it by some strange, and usually cruel, action.Rostov felt ill at ease. He tried, but failed, to find some joke withwhich to reply to Dolokhov's words. But before he had thought ofanything, Dolokhov, looking straight in his face, said slowly anddeliberately so that everyone could hear:"Do you remember we had a talk about cards... 'He's a fool who trusts toluck, one should make certain,' and I want to try.""To try his luck or the certainty?" Rostov asked himself."Well, you'd better not play," Dolokhov added, and springing a new packof cards said: "Bank, gentlemen!"Moving the money forward he prepared to deal. Rostov sat down by hisside and at first did not play. Dolokhov kept glancing at him."Why don't you play?" he asked.And strange to say Nicholas felt that he could not help taking up acard, putting a small stake on it, and beginning to play."I have no money with me," he said."I'll trust you."Rostov staked five rubles on a card and lost, staked again, and againlost. Dolokhov "killed," that is, beat, ten cards of Rostov's running."Gentlemen," said Dolokhov after he had dealt for some time. "Pleaseplace your money on the cards or I may get muddled in the reckoning."One of the players said he hoped he might be trusted."Yes, you might, but I am afraid of getting the accounts mixed. So I askyou to put the money on your cards," replied Dolokhov. "Don't stintyourself, we'll settle afterwards," he added, turning to Rostov.The game continued; a waiter kept handing round champagne.All Rostov's cards were beaten and he had eight hundred rubles scored upagainst him. He wrote "800 rubles" on a card, but while the waiterfilled his glass he changed his mind and altered it to his usual stakeof twenty rubles."Leave it," said Dolokhov, though he did not seem to be even looking atRostov, "you'll win it back all the sooner. I lose to the others but winfrom you. Or are you afraid of me?" he asked again.Rostov submitted. He let the eight hundred remain and laid down a sevenof hearts with a torn corner, which he had picked up from the floor. Hewell remembered that seven afterwards. He laid down the seven of hearts,on which with a broken bit of chalk he had written "800 rubles" in clearupright figures; he emptied the glass of warm champagne that was handedhim, smiled at Dolokhov's words, and with a sinking heart, waiting for aseven to turn up, gazed at Dolokhov's hands which held the pack. Muchdepended on Rostov's winning or losing on that seven of hearts. On theprevious Sunday the old count had given his son two thousand rubles, andthough he always disliked speaking of money difficulties had toldNicholas that this was all he could let him have till May, and asked himto be more economical this time. Nicholas had replied that it would bemore than enough for him and that he gave his word of honor not to takeanything more till the spring. Now only twelve hundred rubles was leftof that money, so that this seven of hearts meant for him not only theloss of sixteen hundred rubles, but the necessity of going back on hisword. With a sinking heart he watched Dolokhov's hands and thought, "Nowthen, make haste and let me have this card and I'll take my cap anddrive home to supper with Denisov, Natasha, and Sonya, and willcertainly never touch a card again." At that moment his home life, jokeswith Petya, talks with Sonya, duets with Natasha, piquet with hisfather, and even his comfortable bed in the house on the Povarskaya rosebefore him with such vividness, clearness, and charm that it seemed asif it were all a lost and unappreciated bliss, long past. He could notconceive that a stupid chance, letting the seven be dealt to the rightrather than to the left, might deprive him of all this happiness, newlyappreciated and newly illumined, and plunge him into the depths ofunknown and undefined misery. That could not be, yet he awaited with asinking heart the movement of Dolokhov's hands. Those broad, reddishhands, with hairy wrists visible from under the shirt cuffs, laid downthe pack and took up a glass and a pipe that were handed him."So you are not afraid to play with me?" repeated Dolokhov, and as ifabout to tell a good story he put down the cards, leaned back in hischair, and began deliberately with a smile:"Yes, gentlemen, I've been told there's a rumor going about Moscow thatI'm a sharper, so I advise you to be careful.""Come now, deal!" exclaimed Rostov."Oh, those Moscow gossips!" said Dolokhov, and he took up the cards witha smile."Aah!" Rostov almost screamed lifting both hands to his head. The sevenhe needed was lying uppermost, the first card in the pack. He had lostmore than he could pay."Still, don't ruin yourself!" said Dolokhov with a side glance at Rostovas he continued to deal.CHAPTER XIVAn hour and a half later most of the players were but little interestedin their own play.The whole interest was concentrated on Rostov. Instead of sixteenhundred rubles he had a long column of figures scored against him, whichhe had reckoned up to ten thousand, but that now, as he vaguelysupposed, must have risen to fifteen thousand. In reality it alreadyexceeded twenty thousand rubles. Dolokhov was no longer listening tostories or telling them, but followed every movement of Rostov's handsand occasionally ran his eyes over the score against him. He had decidedto play until that score reached forty-three thousand. He had fixed onthat number because forty-three was the sum of his and Sonya's jointages. Rostov, leaning his head on both hands, sat at the table which wasscrawled over with figures, wet with spilled wine, and littered withcards. One tormenting impression did not leave him: that those broad-boned reddish hands with hairy wrists visible from under the shirtsleeves, those hands which he loved and hated, held him in their power."Six hundred rubles, ace, a corner, a nine... winning it back'simpossible... Oh, how pleasant it was at home!... The knave, double orquits... it can't be!... And why is he doing this to me?" Rostovpondered. Sometimes he staked a large sum, but Dolokhov refused toaccept it and fixed the stake himself. Nicholas submitted to him, and atone moment prayed to God as he had done on the battlefield at the bridgeover the Enns, and then guessed that the card that came first to handfrom the crumpled heap under the table would save him, now counted thecords on his coat and took a card with that number and tried staking thetotal of his losses on it, then he looked round for aid from the otherplayers, or peered at the now cold face of Dolokhov and tried to readwhat was passing in his mind."He knows of course what this loss means to me. He can't want my ruin.Wasn't he my friend? Wasn't I fond of him? But it's not his fault.What's he to do if he has such luck?... And it's not my fault either,"he thought to himself, "I have done nothing wrong. Have I killed anyone,or insulted or wished harm to anyone? Why such a terrible misfortune?And when did it begin? Such a little while ago I came to this table withthe thought of winning a hundred rubles to buy that casket for Mamma'sname day and then going home. I was so happy, so free, so lighthearted!And I did not realize how happy I was! When did that end and when didthis new, terrible state of things begin? What marked the change? I satall the time in this same place at this table, chose and placed cards,and watched those broad-boned agile hands in the same way. When did ithappen and what has happened? I am well and strong and still the sameand in the same place. No, it can't be! Surely it will all end innothing!"He was flushed and bathed in perspiration, though the room was not hot.His face was terrible and piteous to see, especially from its helplessefforts to seem calm.The score against him reached the fateful sum of forty-three thousand.Rostov had just prepared a card, by bending the corner of which he meantto double the three thousand just put down to his score, when Dolokhov,slamming down the pack of cards, put it aside and began rapidly addingup the total of Rostov's debt, breaking the chalk as he marked thefigures in his clear, bold hand."Supper, it's time for supper! And here are the gypsies!"Some swarthy men and women were really entering from the cold outsideand saying something in their gypsy accents. Nicholas understood that itwas all over; but he said in an indifferent tone:"Well, won't you go on? I had a splendid card all ready," as if it werethe fun of the game which interested him most."It's all up! I'm lost!" thought he. "Now a bullet through my brain--that's all that's left me!" And at the same time he said in a cheerfulvoice:"Come now, just this one more little card!""All right!" said Dolokhov, having finished the addition. "All right!Twenty-one rubles," he said, pointing to the figure twenty-one by whichthe total exceeded the round sum of forty-three thousand; and taking upa pack he prepared to deal. Rostov submissively unbent the corner of hiscard and, instead of the six thousand he had intended, carefully wrotetwenty-one."It's all the same to me," he said. "I only want to see whether you willlet me win this ten, or beat it."Dolokhov began to deal seriously. Oh, how Rostov detested at that momentthose hands with their short reddish fingers and hairy wrists, whichheld him in their power.... The ten fell to him."You owe forty-three thousand, Count," said Dolokhov, and stretchinghimself he rose from the table. "One does get tired sitting so long," headded."Yes, I'm tired too," said Rostov.Dolokhov cut him short, as if to remind him that it was not for him tojest."When am I to receive the money, Count?"Rostov, flushing, drew Dolokhov into the next room."I cannot pay it all immediately. Will you take an I.O.U.?" he said."I say, Rostov," said Dolokhov clearly, smiling and looking Nicholasstraight in the eyes, "you know the saying, 'Lucky in love, unlucky atcards.' Your cousin is in love with you, I know.""Oh, it's terrible to feel oneself so in this man's power," thoughtRostov. He knew what a shock he would inflict on his father and motherby the news of this loss, he knew what a relief it would be to escape itall, and felt that Dolokhov knew that he could save him from all thisshame and sorrow, but wanted now to play with him as a cat does with amouse."Your cousin..." Dolokhov started to say, but Nicholas interrupted him."My cousin has nothing to do with this and it's not necessary to mentionher!" he exclaimed fiercely."Then when am I to have it?""Tomorrow," replied Rostov and left the room.CHAPTER XVTo say "tomorrow" and keep up a dignified tone was not difficult, but togo home alone, see his sisters, brother, mother, and father, confess andask for money he had no right to after giving his word of honor, wasterrible.At home, they had not yet gone to bed. The young people, after returningfrom the theater, had had supper and were grouped round the clavichord.As soon as Nicholas entered, he was enfolded in that poetic atmosphereof love which pervaded the Rostov household that winter and, now afterDolokhov's proposal and Iogel's ball, seemed to have grown thicker roundSonya and Natasha as the air does before a thunderstorm. Sonya andNatasha, in the light-blue dresses they had worn at the theater, lookingpretty and conscious of it, were standing by the clavichord, happy andsmiling. Vera was playing chess with Shinshin in the drawing room. Theold countess, waiting for the return of her husband and son, sat playingpatience with the old gentlewoman who lived in their house. Denisov,with sparkling eyes and ruffled hair, sat at the clavichord strikingchords with his short fingers, his legs thrown back and his eyes rollingas he sang, with his small, husky, but true voice, some verses called"Enchantress," which he had composed, and to which he was trying to fitmusic:Enchantress, say, to my forsaken lyre What magic power is this recallsme still? What spark has set my inmost soul on fire, What is this blissthat makes my fingers thrill?He was singing in passionate tones, gazing with his sparkling black-agate eyes at the frightened and happy Natasha."Splendid! Excellent!" exclaimed Natasha. "Another verse," she said,without noticing Nicholas."Everything's still the same with them," thought Nicholas, glancing intothe drawing room, where he saw Vera and his mother with the old lady."Ah, and here's Nicholas!" cried Natasha, running up to him."Is Papa at home?" he asked."I am so glad you've come!" said Natasha, without answering him. "We areenjoying ourselves! Vasili Dmitrich is staying a day longer for my sake!Did you know?""No, Papa is not back yet," said Sonya."Nicholas, have you come? Come here, dear!" called the old countess fromthe drawing room.Nicholas went to her, kissed her hand, and sitting down silently at hertable began to watch her hands arranging the cards. From the dancingroom, they still heard the laughter and merry voices trying to persuadeNatasha to sing."All wight! All wight!" shouted Denisov. "It's no good making excusesnow! It's your turn to sing the ba'cawolla--I entweat you!"The countess glanced at her silent son."What is the matter?" she asked."Oh, nothing," said he, as if weary of being continually asked the samequestion. "Will Papa be back soon?""I expect so.""Everything's the same with them. They know nothing about it! Where am Ito go?" thought Nicholas, and went again into the dancing room where theclavichord stood.Sonya was sitting at the clavichord, playing the prelude to Denisov'sfavorite barcarolle. Natasha was preparing to sing. Denisov was lookingat her with enraptured eyes.Nicholas began pacing up and down the room."Why do they want to make her sing? How can she sing? There's nothing tobe happy about!" thought he.Sonya struck the first chord of the prelude."My God, I'm a ruined and dishonored man! A bullet through my brain isthe only thing left me--not singing!" his thoughts ran on. "Go away? Butwhere to? It's one--let them sing!"He continued to pace the room, looking gloomily at Denisov and the girlsand avoiding their eyes."Nikolenka, what is the matter?" Sonya's eyes fixed on him seemed toask. She noticed at once that something had happened to him.Nicholas turned away from her. Natasha too, with her quick instinct, hadinstantly noticed her brother's condition. But, though she noticed it,she was herself in such high spirits at that moment, so far from sorrow,sadness, or self-reproach, that she purposely deceived herself as youngpeople often do. "No, I am too happy now to spoil my enjoyment bysympathy with anyone's sorrow," she felt, and she said to herself: "No,I must be mistaken, he must be feeling happy, just as I am.""Now, Sonya!" she said, going to the very middle of the room, where sheconsidered the resonance was best.Having lifted her head and let her arms droop lifelessly, as balletdancers do, Natasha, rising energetically from her heels to her toes,stepped to the middle of the room and stood still."Yes, that's me!" she seemed to say, answering the rapt gaze with whichDenisov followed her."And what is she so pleased about?" thought Nicholas, looking at hissister. "Why isn't she dull and ashamed?"Natasha took the first note, her throat swelled, her chest rose, hereyes became serious. At that moment she was oblivious of hersurroundings, and from her smiling lips flowed sounds which anyone mayproduce at the same intervals and hold for the same time, but whichleave you cold a thousand times and the thousand and first time thrillyou and make you weep.Natasha, that winter, had for the first time begun to sing seriously,mainly because Denisov so delighted in her singing. She no longer sangas a child, there was no longer in her singing that comical, childish,painstaking effect that had been in it before; but she did not yet singwell, as all the connoisseurs who heard her said: "It is not trained,but it is a beautiful voice that must be trained." Only they generallysaid this some time after she had finished singing. While that untrainedvoice, with its incorrect breathing and labored transitions, wassounding, even the connoisseurs said nothing, but only delighted in itand wished to hear it again. In her voice there was a virginalfreshness, an unconsciousness of her own powers, and an as yet untrainedvelvety softness, which so mingled with her lack of art in singing thatit seemed as if nothing in that voice could be altered without spoilingit."What is this?" thought Nicholas, listening to her with widely openedeyes. "What has happened to her? How she is singing today!" And suddenlythe whole world centered for him on anticipation of the next note, thenext phrase, and everything in the world was divided into three beats:"Oh mio crudele affetto."... One, two, three... one, two, three...One... "Oh mio crudele affetto."... One, two, three... One. "Oh, thissenseless life of ours!" thought Nicholas. "All this misery, and money,and Dolokhov, and anger, and honor--it's all nonsense... but this isreal.... Now then, Natasha, now then, dearest! Now then, darling! Howwill she take that si? She's taken it! Thank God!" And without noticingthat he was singing, to strengthen the si he sung a second, a thirdbelow the high note. "Ah, God! How fine! Did I really take it? Howfortunate!" he thought.Oh, how that chord vibrated, and how moved was something that was finestin Rostov's soul! And this something was apart from everything else inthe world and above everything in the world. "What were losses, andDolokhov, and words of honor?... All nonsense! One might kill and roband yet be happy..."CHAPTER XVIIt was long since Rostov had felt such enjoyment from music as he didthat day. But no sooner had Natasha finished her barcarolle than realityagain presented itself. He got up without saying a word and wentdownstairs to his own room. A quarter of an hour later the old countcame in from his club, cheerful and contented. Nicholas, hearing himdrive up, went to meet him."Well--had a good time?" said the old count, smiling gaily and proudlyat his son.Nicholas tried to say "Yes," but could not: and he nearly burst intosobs. The count was lighting his pipe and did not notice his son'scondition."Ah, it can't be avoided!" thought Nicholas, for the first and lasttime. And suddenly, in the most casual tone, which made him feel ashamedof himself, he said, as if merely asking his father to let him have thecarriage to drive to town:"Papa, I have come on a matter of business. I was nearly forgetting. Ineed some money.""Dear me!" said his father, who was in a specially good humor. "I toldyou it would not be enough. How much?""Very much," said Nicholas flushing, and with a stupid careless smile,for which he was long unable to forgive himself, "I have lost a little,I mean a good deal, a great deal--forty three thousand.""What! To whom?... Nonsense!" cried the count, suddenly reddening withan apoplectic flush over neck and nape as old people do."I promised to pay tomorrow," said Nicholas."Well!..." said the old count, spreading out his arms and sinkinghelplessly on the sofa."It can't be helped It happens to everyone!" said the son, with a bold,free, and easy tone, while in his soul he regarded himself as aworthless scoundrel whose whole life could not atone for his crime. Helonged to kiss his father's hands and kneel to beg his forgiveness, butsaid, in a careless and even rude voice, that it happens to everyone!The old count cast down his eyes on hearing his son's words and beganbustlingly searching for something."Yes, yes," he muttered, "it will be difficult, I fear, difficult toraise... happens to everybody! Yes, who has not done it?"And with a furtive glance at his son's face, the count went out of theroom.... Nicholas had been prepared for resistance, but had not at allexpected this."Papa! Pa-pa!" he called after him, sobbing, "forgive me!" And seizinghis father's hand, he pressed it to his lips and burst into tears.While father and son were having their explanation, the mother anddaughter were having one not less important. Natasha came running to hermother, quite excited."Mamma!... Mamma!... He has made me...""Made what?""Made, made me an offer, Mamma! Mamma!" she exclaimed.The countess did not believe her ears. Denisov had proposed. To whom? Tothis chit of a girl, Natasha, who not so long ago was playing with dollsand who was still having lessons."Don't, Natasha! What nonsense!" she said, hoping it was a joke."Nonsense, indeed! I am telling you the fact," said Natasha indignantly."I come to ask you what to do, and you call it 'nonsense!'"The countess shrugged her shoulders."If it is true that Monsieur Denisov has made you a proposal, tell himhe is a fool, that's all!""No, he's not a fool!" replied Natasha indignantly and seriously."Well then, what do you want? You're all in love nowadays. Well, if youare in love, marry him!" said the countess, with a laugh of annoyance."Good luck to you!""No, Mamma, I'm not in love with him, I suppose I'm not in love withhim.""Well then, tell him so.""Mamma, are you cross? Don't be cross, dear! Is it my fault?""No, but what is it, my dear? Do you want me to go and tell him?" saidthe countess smiling."No, I will do it myself, only tell me what to say. It's all very wellfor you," said Natasha, with a responsive smile. "You should have seenhow he said it! I know he did not mean to say it, but it came outaccidently.""Well, all the same, you must refuse him.""No, I mustn't. I am so sorry for him! He's so nice.""Well then, accept his offer. It's high time for you to be married,"answered the countess sharply and sarcastically."No, Mamma, but I'm so sorry for him. I don't know how I'm to say it.""And there's nothing for you to say. I shall speak to him myself," saidthe countess, indignant that they should have dared to treat this littleNatasha as grown up."No, not on any account! I will tell him myself, and you'll listen atthe door," and Natasha ran across the drawing room to the dancing hall,where Denisov was sitting on the same chair by the clavichord with hisface in his hands.He jumped up at the sound of her light step."Nataly," he said, moving with rapid steps toward her, "decide my fate.It is in your hands.""Vasili Dmitrich, I'm so sorry for you!... No, but you are so nice...but it won't do...not that... but as a friend, I shall always love you."Denisov bent over her hand and she heard strange sounds she did notunderstand. She kissed his rough curly black head. At this instant, theyheard the quick rustle of the countess' dress. She came up to them."Vasili Dmitrich, I thank you for the honor," she said, with anembarrassed voice, though it sounded severe to Denisov--"but my daughteris so young, and I thought that, as my son's friend, you would haveaddressed yourself first to me. In that case you would not have obligedme to give this refusal.""Countess..." said Denisov, with downcast eyes and a guilty face. Hetried to say more, but faltered.Natasha could not remain calm, seeing him in such a plight. She began tosob aloud."Countess, I have done w'ong," Denisov went on in an unsteady voice,"but believe me, I so adore your daughter and all your family that Iwould give my life twice over..." He looked at the countess, and seeingher severe face said: "Well, good-by, Countess," and kissing her hand,he left the room with quick resolute strides, without looking atNatasha.Next day Rostov saw Denisov off. He did not wish to stay another day inMoscow. All Denisov's Moscow friends gave him a farewell entertainmentat the gypsies', with the result that he had no recollection of how hewas put in the sleigh or of the first three stages of his journey.After Denisov's departure, Rostov spent another fortnight in Moscow,without going out of the house, waiting for the money his father couldnot at once raise, and he spent most of his time in the girls' room.Sonya was more tender and devoted to him than ever. It was as if shewanted to show him that his losses were an achievement that made herlove him all the more, but Nicholas now considered himself unworthy ofher.He filled the girls' albums with verses and music, and having at lastsent Dolokhov the whole forty-three thousand rubles and received hisreceipt, he left at the end of November, without taking leave of any ofhis acquaintances, to overtake his regiment which was already in Poland.BOOK FIVE: 1806 - 07CHAPTER IAfter his interview with his wife Pierre left for Petersburg. At theTorzhok post station, either there were no horses or the postmasterwould not supply them. Pierre was obliged to wait. Without undressing,he lay down on the leather sofa in front of a round table, put his bigfeet in their overboots on the table, and began to reflect."Will you have the portmanteaus brought in? And a bed got ready, andtea?" asked his valet.Pierre gave no answer, for he neither heard nor saw anything. He hadbegun to think of the last station and was still pondering on the samequestion--one so important that he took no notice of what went on aroundhim. Not only was he indifferent as to whether he got to Petersburgearlier or later, or whether he secured accommodation at this station,but compared to the thoughts that now occupied him it was a matter ofindifference whether he remained there for a few hours or for the restof his life.The postmaster, his wife, the valet, and a peasant woman selling Torzhokembroidery came into the room offering their services. Without changinghis careless attitude, Pierre looked at them over his spectacles unableto understand what they wanted or how they could go on living withouthaving solved the problems that so absorbed him. He had been engrossedby the same thoughts ever since the day he returned from Sokolniki afterthe duel and had spent that first agonizing, sleepless night. But now,in the solitude of the journey, they seized him with special force. Nomatter what he thought about, he always returned to these same questionswhich he could not solve and yet could not cease to ask himself. It wasas if the thread of the chief screw which held his life together werestripped, so that the screw could not get in or out, but went on turninguselessly in the same place.The postmaster came in and began obsequiously to beg his excellency towait only two hours, when, come what might, he would let his excellencyhave the courier horses. It was plain that he was lying and only wantedto get more money from the traveler."Is this good or bad?" Pierre asked himself. "It is good for me, bad foranother traveler, and for himself it's unavoidable, because he needsmoney for food; the man said an officer had once given him a thrashingfor letting a private traveler have the courier horses. But the officerthrashed him because he had to get on as quickly as possible. And I,"continued Pierre, "shot Dolokhov because I considered myself injured,and Louis XVI was executed because they considered him a criminal, and ayear later they executed those who executed him--also for some reason.What is bad? What is good? What should one love and what hate? What doesone live for? And what am I? What is life, and what is death? What powergoverns all?"There was no answer to any of these questions, except one, and that nota logical answer and not at all a reply to them. The answer was: "You'lldie and all will end. You'll die and know all, or cease asking." Butdying was also dreadful.The Torzhok peddler woman, in a whining voice, went on offering herwares, especially a pair of goatskin slippers. "I have hundreds ofrubles I don't know what to do with, and she stands in her tatteredcloak looking timidly at me," he thought. "And what does she want themoney for? As if that money could add a hair's breadth to happiness orpeace of mind. Can anything in the world make her or me less a prey toevil and death?--death which ends all and must come today or tomorrow--at any rate, in an instant as compared with eternity." And again hetwisted the screw with the stripped thread, and again it turneduselessly in the same place.His servant handed him a half-cut novel, in the form of letters, byMadame de Souza. He began reading about the sufferings and virtuousstruggles of a certain Emilie de Mansfeld. "And why did she resist herseducer when she loved him?" he thought. "God could not have put intoher heart an impulse that was against His will. My wife--as she oncewas--did not struggle, and perhaps she was right. Nothing has been foundout, nothing discovered," Pierre again said to himself. "All we can knowis that we know nothing. And that's the height of human wisdom."Everything within and around him seemed confused, senseless, andrepellent. Yet in this very repugnance to all his circumstances Pierrefound a kind of tantalizing satisfaction."I make bold to ask your excellency to move a little for thisgentleman," said the postmaster, entering the room followed by anothertraveler, also detained for lack of horses.The newcomer was a short, large-boned, yellow-faced, wrinkled old man,with gray bushy eyebrows overhanging bright eyes of an indefinitegrayish color.Pierre took his feet off the table, stood up, and lay down on a bed thathad been got ready for him, glancing now and then at the newcomer, who,with a gloomy and tired face, was wearily taking off his wraps with theaid of his servant, and not looking at Pierre. With a pair of felt bootson his thin bony legs, and keeping on a worn, nankeen-covered, sheepskincoat, the traveler sat down on the sofa, leaned back his big head withits broad temples and close-cropped hair, and looked at Bezukhov. Thestern, shrewd, and penetrating expression of that look struck Pierre. Hefelt a wish to speak to the stranger, but by the time he had made up hismind to ask him a question about the roads, the traveler had closed hiseyes. His shriveled old hands were folded and on the finger of one ofthem Pierre noticed a large cast iron ring with a seal representing adeath's head. The stranger sat without stirring, either resting or, asit seemed to Pierre, sunk in profound and calm meditation. His servantwas also a yellow, wrinkled old man, without beard or mustache,evidently not because he was shaven but because they had never grown.This active old servant was unpacking the traveler's canteen andpreparing tea. He brought in a boiling samovar. When everything wasready, the stranger opened his eyes, moved to the table, filled atumbler with tea for himself and one for the beardless old man to whomhe passed it. Pierre began to feel a sense of uneasiness, and the need,even the inevitability, of entering into conversation with thisstranger.The servant brought back his tumbler turned upside down, * with anunfinished bit of nibbled sugar, and asked if anything more would bewanted.* To indicate he did not want more tea."No. Give me the book," said the stranger.The servant handed him a book which Pierre took to be a devotional work,and the traveler became absorbed in it. Pierre looked at him. All atonce the stranger closed the book, putting in a marker, and again,leaning with his arms on the back of the sofa, sat in his formerposition with his eyes shut. Pierre looked at him and had not time toturn away when the old man, opening his eyes, fixed his steady andsevere gaze straight on Pierre's face.Pierre felt confused and wished to avoid that look, but the bright oldeyes attracted him irresistibly.CHAPTER II"I have the pleasure of addressing Count Bezukhov, if I am notmistaken," said the stranger in a deliberate and loud voice.Pierre looked silently and inquiringly at him over his spectacles."I have heard of you, my dear sir," continued the stranger, "and of yourmisfortune." He seemed to emphasize the last word, as if to say--"Yes,misfortune! Call it what you please, I know that what happened to you inMoscow was a misfortune."--"I regret it very much, my dear sir."Pierre flushed and, hurriedly putting his legs down from the bed, bentforward toward the old man with a forced and timid smile."I have not referred to this out of curiosity, my dear sir, but forgreater reasons."He paused, his gaze still on Pierre, and moved aside on the sofa by wayof inviting the other to take a seat beside him. Pierre felt reluctantto enter into conversation with this old man, but, submitting to himinvoluntarily, came up and sat down beside him."You are unhappy, my dear sir," the stranger continued. "You are youngand I am old. I should like to help you as far as lies in my power.""Oh, yes!" said Pierre, with a forced smile. "I am very grateful to you.Where are you traveling from?"The stranger's face was not genial, it was even cold and severe, but inspite of this, both the face and words of his new acquaintance wereirresistibly attractive to Pierre."But if for reason you don't feel inclined to talk to me," said the oldman, "say so, my dear sir." And he suddenly smiled, in an unexpected andtenderly paternal way."Oh no, not at all! On the contrary, I am very glad to make youracquaintance," said Pierre. And again, glancing at the stranger's hands,he looked more closely at the ring, with its skull--a masonic sign."Allow me to ask," he said, "are you a Mason?""Yes, I belong to the Brotherhood of the Freemasons," said the stranger,looking deeper and deeper into Pierre's eyes. "And in their name and myown I hold out a brotherly hand to you.""I am afraid," said Pierre, smiling, and wavering between the confidencethe personality of the Freemason inspired in him and his own habit ofridiculing the masonic beliefs--"I am afraid I am very far fromunderstanding--how am I to put it?--I am afraid my way of looking at theworld is so opposed to yours that we shall not understand one another.""I know your outlook," said the Mason, "and the view of life youmention, and which you think is the result of your own mental efforts,is the one held by the majority of people, and is the invariable fruitof pride, indolence, and ignorance. Forgive me, my dear sir, but if Ihad not known it I should not have addressed you. Your view of life is aregrettable delusion.""Just as I may suppose you to be deluded," said Pierre, with a faintsmile."I should never dare to say that I know the truth," said the Mason,whose words struck Pierre more and more by their precision and firmness."No one can attain to truth by himself. Only by laying stone on stonewith the cooperation of all, by the millions of generations from ourforefather Adam to our own times, is that temple reared which is to be aworthy dwelling place of the Great God," he added, and closed his eyes."I ought to tell you that I do not believe... do not believe in God,"said Pierre, regretfully and with an effort, feeling it essential tospeak the whole truth.The Mason looked intently at Pierre and smiled as a rich man withmillions in hand might smile at a poor fellow who told him that he, poorman, had not the five rubles that would make him happy."Yes, you do not know Him, my dear sir," said the Mason. "You cannotknow Him. You do not know Him and that is why you are unhappy.""Yes, yes, I am unhappy," assented Pierre. "But what am I to do?""You know Him not, my dear sir, and so you are very unhappy. You do notknow Him, but He is here, He is in me, He is in my words, He is in thee,and even in those blasphemous words thou hast just uttered!" pronouncedthe Mason in a stern and tremulous voice.He paused and sighed, evidently trying to calm himself."If He were not," he said quietly, "you and I would not be speaking ofHim, my dear sir. Of what, of whom, are we speaking? Whom hast thoudenied?" he suddenly asked with exulting austerity and authority in hisvoice. "Who invented Him, if He did not exist? Whence came thyconception of the existence of such an incomprehensible Being? didstthou, and why did the whole world, conceive the idea of the existence ofsuch an incomprehensible Being, a Being all-powerful, eternal, andinfinite in all His attributes?..."He stopped and remained silent for a long time.Pierre could not and did not wish to break this silence."He exists, but to understand Him is hard," the Mason began again,looking not at Pierre but straight before him, and turning the leaves ofhis book with his old hands which from excitement he could not keepstill. "If it were a man whose existence thou didst doubt I could bringhim to thee, could take him by the hand and show him to thee. But howcan I, an insignificant mortal, show His omnipotence, His infinity, andall His mercy to one who is blind, or who shuts his eyes that he may notsee or understand Him and may not see or understand his own vileness andsinfulness?" He paused again. "Who art thou? Thou dreamest that thou artwise because thou couldst utter those blasphemous words," he went on,with a somber and scornful smile. "And thou art more foolish andunreasonable than a little child, who, playing with the parts of askillfully made watch, dares to say that, as he does not understand itsuse, he does not believe in the master who made it. To know Him ishard.... For ages, from our forefather Adam to our own day, we labor toattain that knowledge and are still infinitely far from our aim; but inour lack of understanding we see only our weakness and Hisgreatness...."Pierre listened with swelling heart, gazing into the Mason's face withshining eyes, not interrupting or questioning him, but believing withhis whole soul what the stranger said. Whether he accepted the wisereasoning contained in the Mason's words, or believed as a childbelieves, in the speaker's tone of conviction and earnestness, or thetremor of the speaker's voice--which sometimes almost broke--or thosebrilliant aged eyes grown old in this conviction, or the calm firmnessand certainty of his vocation, which radiated from his whole being (andwhich struck Pierre especially by contrast with his own dejection andhopelessness)--at any rate, Pierre longed with his whole soul to believeand he did believe, and felt a joyful sense of comfort, regeneration,and return to life."He is not to be apprehended by reason, but by life," said the Mason."I do not understand," said Pierre, feeling with dismay doubtsreawakening. He was afraid of any want of clearness, any weakness, inthe Mason's arguments; he dreaded not to be able to believe in him. "Idon't understand," he said, "how it is that the mind of man cannotattain the knowledge of which you speak."The Mason smiled with his gentle fatherly smile."The highest wisdom and truth are like the purest liquid we may wish toimbibe," he said. "Can I receive that pure liquid into an impure vesseland judge of its purity? Only by the inner purification of myself can Iretain in some degree of purity the liquid I receive.""Yes, yes, that is so," said Pierre joyfully."The highest wisdom is not founded on reason alone, not on those worldlysciences of physics, history, chemistry, and the like, into whichintellectual knowledge is divided. The highest wisdom is one. Thehighest wisdom has but one science--the science of the whole--thescience explaining the whole creation and man's place in it. To receivethat science it is necessary to purify and renew one's inner self, andso before one can know, it is necessary to believe and to perfect one'sself. And to attain this end, we have the light called conscience thatGod has implanted in our souls.""Yes, yes," assented Pierre."Look then at thy inner self with the eyes of the spirit, and askthyself whether thou art content with thyself. What hast thou attainedrelying on reason only? What art thou? You are young, you are rich, youare clever, you are well educated. And what have you done with all thesegood gifts? Are you content with yourself and with your life?""No, I hate my life," Pierre muttered, wincing."Thou hatest it. Then change it, purify thyself; and as thou artpurified, thou wilt gain wisdom. Look at your life, my dear sir. Howhave you spent it? In riotous orgies and debauchery, receivingeverything from society and giving nothing in return. You have becomethe possessor of wealth. How have you used it? What have you done foryour neighbor? Have you ever thought of your tens of thousands ofslaves? Have you helped them physically and morally? No! You haveprofited by their toil to lead a profligate life. That is what you havedone. Have you chosen a post in which you might be of service to yourneighbor? No! You have spent your life in idleness. Then you married, mydear sir--took on yourself responsibility for the guidance of a youngwoman; and what have you done? You have not helped her to find the wayof truth, my dear sir, but have thrust her into an abyss of deceit andmisery. A man offended you and you shot him, and you say you do not knowGod and hate your life. There is nothing strange in that, my dear sir!"After these words, the Mason, as if tired by his long discourse, againleaned his arms on the back of the sofa and closed his eyes. Pierrelooked at that aged, stern, motionless, almost lifeless face and movedhis lips without uttering a sound. He wished to say, "Yes, a vile, idle,vicious life!" but dared not break the silence.The Mason cleared his throat huskily, as old men do, and called hisservant."How about the horses?" he asked, without looking at Pierre."The exchange horses have just come," answered the servant. "Will younot rest here?""No, tell them to harness.""Can he really be going away leaving me alone without having told meall, and without promising to help me?" thought Pierre, rising withdowncast head; and he began to pace the room, glancing occasionally atthe Mason. "Yes, I never thought of it, but I have led a contemptibleand profligate life, though I did not like it and did not want to,"thought Pierre. "But this man knows the truth and, if he wished to,could disclose it to me."Pierre wished to say this to the Mason, but did not dare to. Thetraveler, having packed his things with his practiced hands, beganfastening his coat. When he had finished, he turned to Bezukhov, andsaid in a tone of indifferent politeness:"Where are you going to now, my dear sir?""I?... I'm going to Petersburg," answered Pierre, in a childlike,hesitating voice. "I thank you. I agree with all you have said. But donot suppose me to be so bad. With my whole soul I wish to be what youwould have me be, but I have never had help from anyone.... But it is I,above all, who am to blame for everything. Help me, teach me, andperhaps I may..."Pierre could not go on. He gulped and turned away.The Mason remained silent for a long time, evidently considering."Help comes from God alone," he said, "but such measure of help as ourOrder can bestow it will render you, my dear sir. You are going toPetersburg. Hand this to Count Willarski" (he took out his notebook andwrote a few words on a large sheet of paper folded in four). "Allow meto give you a piece of advice. When you reach the capital, first of alldevote some time to solitude and self-examination and do not resume yourformer way of life. And now I wish you a good journey, my dear sir," headded, seeing that his servant had entered... "and success."The traveler was Joseph Alexeevich Bazdeev, as Pierre saw from thepostmaster's book. Bazdeev had been one of the best-known Freemasons andMartinists, even in Novikov's time. For a long while after he had gone,Pierre did not go to bed or order horses but paced up and down the room,pondering over his vicious past, and with a rapturous sense of beginninganew pictured to himself the blissful, irreproachable, virtuous futurethat seemed to him so easy. It seemed to him that he had been viciousonly because he had somehow forgotten how good it is to be virtuous. Nota trace of his former doubts remained in his soul. He firmly believed inthe possibility of the brotherhood of men united in the aim ofsupporting one another in the path of virtue, and that is howFreemasonry presented itself to him.CHAPTER IIIOn reaching Petersburg Pierre did not let anyone know of his arrival, hewent nowhere and spent whole days in reading Thomas a Kempis, whose bookhad been sent him by someone unknown. One thing he continually realizedas he read that book: the joy, hitherto unknown to him, of believing inthe possibility of attaining perfection, and in the possibility ofactive brotherly love among men, which Joseph Alexeevich had revealed tohim. A week after his arrival, the young Polish count, Willarski, whomPierre had known slightly in Petersburg society, came into his room oneevening in the official and ceremonious manner in which Dolokhov'ssecond had called on him, and, having closed the door behind him andsatisfied himself that there was nobody else in the room, addressedPierre."I have come to you with a message and an offer, Count," he said withoutsitting down. "A person of very high standing in our Brotherhood hasmade application for you to be received into our Order before the usualterm and has proposed to me to be your sponsor. I consider it a sacredduty to fulfill that person's wishes. Do you wish to enter theBrotherhood of Freemasons under my sponsorship?"The cold, austere tone of this man, whom he had almost always before metat balls, amiably smiling in the society of the most brilliant women,surprised Pierre."Yes, I do wish it," said he.Willarski bowed his head."One more question, Count," he said, "which I beg you to answer in allsincerity--not as a future Mason but as an honest man: have yourenounced your former convictions--do you believe in God?"Pierre considered."Yes... yes, I believe in God," he said."In that case..." began Willarski, but Pierre interrupted him."Yes, I do believe in God," he repeated."In that case we can go," said Willarski. "My carriage is at yourservice."Willarski was silent throughout the drive. To Pierre's inquiries as towhat he must do and how he should answer, Willarski only replied thatbrothers more worthy than he would test him and that Pierre had only totell the truth.Having entered the courtyard of a large house where the Lodge had itsheadquarters, and having ascended a dark staircase, they entered a smallwell-lit anteroom where they took off their cloaks without the aid of aservant. From there they passed into another room. A man in strangeattire appeared at the door. Willarski, stepping toward him, saidsomething to him in French in an undertone and then went up to a smallwardrobe in which Pierre noticed garments such as he had never seenbefore. Having taken a kerchief from the cupboard, Willarski boundPierre's eyes with it and tied it in a knot behind, catching some hairspainfully in the knot. Then he drew his face down, kissed him, andtaking him by the hand led him forward. The hairs tied in the knot hurtPierre and there were lines of pain on his face and a shamefaced smile.His huge figure, with arms hanging down and with a puckered, thoughsmiling face, moved after Willarski with uncertain, timid steps.Having led him about ten paces, Willarski stopped."Whatever happens to you," he said, "you must bear it all manfully ifyou have firmly resolved to join our Brotherhood." (Pierre noddedaffirmatively.) "When you hear a knock at the door, you will uncoveryour eyes," added Willarski. "I wish you courage and success," and,pressing Pierre's hand, he went out.Left alone, Pierre went on smiling in the same way. Once or twice heshrugged his shoulders and raised his hand to the kerchief, as ifwishing to take it off, but let it drop again. The five minutes spentwith his eyes bandaged seemed to him an hour. His arms felt numb, hislegs almost gave way, it seemed to him that he was tired out. Heexperienced a variety of most complex sensations. He felt afraid of whatwould happen to him and still more afraid of showing his fear. He feltcurious to know what was going to happen and what would be revealed tohim; but most of all, he felt joyful that the moment had come when hewould at last start on that path of regeneration and on the activelyvirtuous life of which he had been dreaming since he met JosephAlexeevich. Loud knocks were heard at the door. Pierre took the bandageoff his eyes and glanced around him. The room was in black darkness,only a small lamp was burning inside something white. Pierre went nearerand saw that the lamp stood on a black table on which lay an open book.The book was the Gospel, and the white thing with the lamp inside was ahuman skull with its cavities and teeth. After reading the first wordsof the Gospel: "In the beginning was the Word and the Word was withGod," Pierre went round the table and saw a large open box filled withsomething. It was a coffin with bones inside. He was not at allsurprised by what he saw. Hoping to enter on an entirely new life quiteunlike the old one, he expected everything to be unusual, even moreunusual than what he was seeing. A skull, a coffin, the Gospel--itseemed to him that he had expected all this and even more. Trying tostimulate his emotions he looked around. "God, death, love, thebrotherhood of man," he kept saying to himself, associating these wordswith vague yet joyful ideas. The door opened and someone came in.By the dim light, to which Pierre had already become accustomed, he sawa rather a short man. Having evidently come from the light into thedarkness, the man paused, then moved with cautious steps toward thetable and placed on it his small leather-gloved hands.This short man had on a white leather apron which covered his chest andpart of his legs; he had on a kind of necklace above which rose a highwhite ruffle, outlining his rather long face which was lit up frombelow."For what have you come hither?" asked the newcomer, turning in Pierre'sdirection at a slight rustle made by the latter. "Why have you, who donot believe in the truth of the light and who have not seen the light,come here? What do you seek from us? Wisdom, virtue, enlightenment?"At the moment the door opened and the stranger came in, Pierre felt asense of awe and veneration such as he had experienced in his boyhood atconfession; he felt himself in the presence of one socially a completestranger, yet nearer to him through the brotherhood of man. With batedbreath and beating heart he moved toward the Rhetor (by which name thebrother who prepared a seeker for entrance into the Brotherhood wasknown). Drawing nearer, he recognized in the Rhetor a man he knew,Smolyaninov, and it mortified him to think that the newcomer was anacquaintance--he wished him simply a brother and a virtuous instructor.For a long time he could not utter a word, so that the Rhetor had torepeat his question."Yes... I... I... desire regeneration," Pierre uttered with difficulty."Very well," said Smolyaninov, and went on at once: "Have you any ideaof the means by which our holy Order will help you to reach your aim?"said he quietly and quickly."I... hope... for guidance... help... in regeneration," said Pierre,with a trembling voice and some difficulty in utterance due to hisexcitement and to being unaccustomed to speak of abstract matters inRussian."What is your conception of Freemasonry?""I imagine that Freemasonry is the fraternity and equality of men whohave virtuous aims," said Pierre, feeling ashamed of the inadequacy ofhis words for the solemnity of the moment, as he spoke. "I imagine...""Good!" said the Rhetor quickly, apparently satisfied with this answer."Have you sought for means of attaining your aim in religion?""No, I considered it erroneous and did not follow it," said Pierre, sosoftly that the Rhetor did not hear him and asked him what he wassaying. "I have been an atheist," answered Pierre."You are seeking for truth in order to follow its laws in your life,therefore you seek wisdom and virtue. Is that not so?" said the Rhetor,after a moment's pause."Yes, yes," assented Pierre.The Rhetor cleared his throat, crossed his gloved hands on his breast,and began to speak."Now I must disclose to you the chief aim of our Order," he said, "andif this aim coincides with yours, you may enter our Brotherhood withprofit. The first and chief object of our Order, the foundation on whichit rests and which no human power can destroy, is the preservation andhanding on to posterity of a certain important mystery... which has comedown to us from the remotest ages, even from the first man--a mystery onwhich perhaps the fate of mankind depends. But since this mystery is ofsuch a nature that nobody can know or use it unless he be prepared bylong and diligent self-purification, not everyone can hope to attain itquickly. Hence we have a secondary aim, that of preparing our members asmuch as possible to reform their hearts, to purify and enlighten theirminds, by means handed on to us by tradition from those who have strivento attain this mystery, and thereby to render them capable of receivingit."By purifying and regenerating our members we try, thirdly, to improvethe whole human race, offering it in our members an example of piety andvirtue, and thereby try with all our might to combat the evil whichsways the world. Think this over and I will come to you again.""To combat the evil which sways the world..." Pierre repeated, and amental image of his future activity in this direction rose in his mind.He imagined men such as he had himself been a fortnight ago, and headdressed an edifying exhortation to them. He imagined to himselfvicious and unfortunate people whom he would assist by word and deed,imagined oppressors whose victims he would rescue. Of the three objectsmentioned by the Rhetor, this last, that of improving mankind,especially appealed to Pierre. The important mystery mentioned by theRhetor, though it aroused his curiosity, did not seem to him essential,and the second aim, that of purifying and regenerating himself, did notmuch interest him because at that moment he felt with delight that hewas already perfectly cured of his former faults and was ready for allthat was good.Half an hour later, the Rhetor returned to inform the seeker of theseven virtues, corresponding to the seven steps of Solomon's temple,which every Freemason should cultivate in himself. These virtues were:1. Discretion, the keeping of the secrets of the Order. 2. Obedience tothose of higher ranks in the Order. 3. Morality. 4. Love of mankind. 5.Courage. 6. Generosity. 7. The love of death."In the seventh place, try, by the frequent thought of death," theRhetor said, "to bring yourself to regard it not as a dreaded foe, butas a friend that frees the soul grown weary in the labors of virtue fromthis distressful life, and leads it to its place of recompense andpeace.""Yes, that must be so," thought Pierre, when after these words theRhetor went away, leaving him to solitary meditation. "It must be so,but I am still so weak that I love my life, the meaning of which is onlynow gradually opening before me." But five of the other virtues whichPierre recalled, counting them on his fingers, he felt already in hissoul: courage, generosity, morality, love of mankind, and especiallyobedience--which did not even seem to him a virtue, but a joy. (He nowfelt so glad to be free from his own lawlessness and to submit his willto those who knew the indubitable truth.) He forgot what the seventhvirtue was and could not recall it.The third time the Rhetor came back more quickly and asked Pierrewhether he was still firm in his intention and determined to submit toall that would be required of him."I am ready for everything," said Pierre."I must also inform you," said the Rhetor, "that our Order delivers itsteaching not in words only but also by other means, which may perhapshave a stronger effect on the sincere seeker after wisdom and virtuethan mere words. This chamber with what you see therein should alreadyhave suggested to your heart, if it is sincere, more than words coulddo. You will perhaps also see in your further initiation a like methodof enlightenment. Our Order imitates the ancient societies thatexplained their teaching by hieroglyphics. A hieroglyph," said theRhetor, "is an emblem of something not cognizable by the senses butwhich possesses qualities resembling those of the symbol."Pierre knew very well what a hieroglyph was, but dared not speak. Helistened to the Rhetor in silence, feeling from all he said that hisordeal was about to begin."If you are resolved, I must begin your initiation," said the Rhetorcoming closer to Pierre. "In token of generosity I ask you to give meall your valuables.""But I have nothing here," replied Pierre, supposing that he was askedto give up all he possessed."What you have with you: watch, money, rings...."Pierre quickly took out his purse and watch, but could not manage forsome time to get the wedding ring off his fat finger. When that had beendone, the Rhetor said:"In token of obedience, I ask you to undress."Pierre took off his coat, waistcoat, and left boot according to theRhetor's instructions. The Mason drew the shirt back from Pierre's leftbreast, and stooping down pulled up the left leg of his trousers toabove the knee. Pierre hurriedly began taking off his right boot alsoand was going to tuck up the other trouser leg to save this stranger thetrouble, but the Mason told him that was not necessary and gave him aslipper for his left foot. With a childlike smile of embarrassment,doubt, and self-derision, which appeared on his face against his will,Pierre stood with his arms hanging down and legs apart, before hisbrother Rhetor, and awaited his further commands."And now, in token of candor, I ask you to reveal to me your chiefpassion," said the latter."My passion! I have had so many," replied Pierre."That passion which more than all others caused you to waver on the pathof virtue," said the Mason.Pierre paused, seeking a reply."Wine? Gluttony? Idleness? Laziness? Irritability? Anger? Women?" Hewent over his vices in his mind, not knowing to which of them to givethe pre-eminence."Women," he said in a low, scarcely audible voice.The Mason did not move and for a long time said nothing after thisanswer. At last he moved up to Pierre and, taking the kerchief that layon the table, again bound his eyes."For the last time I say to you--turn all your attention upon yourself,put a bridle on your senses, and seek blessedness, not in passion but inyour own heart. The source of blessedness is not without us butwithin...."Pierre had already long been feeling in himself that refreshing sourceof blessedness which now flooded his heart with glad emotion.CHAPTER IVSoon after this there came into the dark chamber to fetch Pierre, notthe Rhetor but Pierre's sponsor, Willarski, whom he recognized by hisvoice. To fresh questions as to the firmness of his resolution Pierrereplied: "Yes, yes, I agree," and with a beaming, childlike smile, hisfat chest uncovered, stepping unevenly and timidly in one slippered andone booted foot, he advanced, while Willarski held a sword to his barechest. He was conducted from that room along passages that turnedbackwards and forwards and was at last brought to the doors of theLodge. Willarski coughed, he was answered by the masonic knock withmallets, the doors opened before them. A bass voice (Pierre was stillblindfolded) questioned him as to who he was, when and where he wasborn, and so on. Then he was again led somewhere still blindfolded, andas they went along he was told allegories of the toils of hispilgrimage, of holy friendship, of the Eternal Architect of theuniverse, and of the courage with which he should endure toils anddangers. During these wanderings, Pierre noticed that he was spoken ofnow as the "Seeker," now as the "Sufferer," and now as the "Postulant,"to the accompaniment of various knockings with mallets and swords. As hewas being led up to some object he noticed a hesitation and uncertaintyamong his conductors. He heard those around him disputing in whispersand one of them insisting that he should be led along a certain carpet.After that they took his right hand, placed it on something, and toldhim to hold a pair of compasses to his left breast with the other handand to repeat after someone who read aloud an oath of fidelity to thelaws of the Order. The candles were then extinguished and some spiritlighted, as Pierre knew by the smell, and he was told that he would nowsee the lesser light. The bandage was taken off his eyes and, by thefaint light of the burning spirit, Pierre, as in a dream, saw severalmen standing before him, wearing aprons like the Rhetor's and holdingswords in their hands pointed at his breast. Among them stood a manwhose white shirt was stained with blood. On seeing this, Pierre movedforward with his breast toward the swords, meaning them to pierce it.But the swords were drawn back from him and he was at once blindfoldedagain."Now thou hast seen the lesser light," uttered a voice. Then the candleswere relit and he was told that he would see the full light; the bandagewas again removed and more than ten voices said together: "Sic transitgloria mundi."Pierre gradually began to recover himself and looked about at the roomand at the people in it. Round a long table covered with black sat sometwelve men in garments like those he had already seen. Some of themPierre had met in Petersburg society. In the President's chair sat ayoung man he did not know, with a peculiar cross hanging from his neck.On his right sat the Italian abbe whom Pierre had met at Anna Pavlovna'stwo years before. There were also present a very distinguished dignitaryand a Swiss who had formerly been tutor at the Kuragins'. All maintaineda solemn silence, listening to the words of the President, who held amallet in his hand. Let into the wall was a star-shaped light. At oneside of the table was a small carpet with various figures worked uponit, at the other was something resembling an altar on which lay aTestament and a skull. Round it stood seven large candlesticks likethose used in churches. Two of the brothers led Pierre up to the altar,placed his feet at right angles, and bade him lie down, saying that hemust prostrate himself at the Gates of the Temple."He must first receive the trowel," whispered one of the brothers."Oh, hush, please!" said another.Pierre, perplexed, looked round with his shortsighted eyes withoutobeying, and suddenly doubts arose in his mind. "Where am I? What am Idoing? Aren't they laughing at me? Shan't I be ashamed to rememberthis?" But these doubts only lasted a moment. Pierre glanced at theserious faces of those around, remembered all he had already gonethrough, and realized that he could not stop halfway. He was aghast athis hesitation and, trying to arouse his former devotional feeling,prostrated himself before the Gates of the Temple. And really, thefeeling of devotion returned to him even more strongly than before. Whenhe had lain there some time, he was told to get up, and a white leatherapron, such as the others wore, was put on him: he was given a troweland three pairs of gloves, and then the Grand Master addressed him. Hetold him that he should try to do nothing to stain the whiteness of thatapron, which symbolized strength and purity; then of the unexplainedtrowel, he told him to toil with it to cleanse his own heart from vice,and indulgently to smooth with it the heart of his neighbor. As to thefirst pair of gloves, a man's, he said that Pierre could not know theirmeaning but must keep them. The second pair of man's gloves he was towear at the meetings, and finally of the third, a pair of women'sgloves, he said: "Dear brother, these woman's gloves are intended foryou too. Give them to the woman whom you shall honor most of all. Thisgift will be a pledge of your purity of heart to her whom you select tobe your worthy helpmeet in Masonry." And after a pause, he added: "Butbeware, dear brother, that these gloves do not deck hands that areunclean." While the Grand Master said these last words it seemed toPierre that he grew embarrassed. Pierre himself grew still moreconfused, blushed like a child till tears came to his eyes, beganlooking about him uneasily, and an awkward pause followed.This silence was broken by one of the brethren, who led Pierre up to therug and began reading to him from a manuscript book an explanation ofall the figures on it: the sun, the moon, a hammer, a plumb line, atrowel, a rough stone and a squared stone, a pillar, three windows, andso on. Then a place was assigned to Pierre, he was shown the signs ofthe Lodge, told the password, and at last was permitted to sit down. TheGrand Master began reading the statutes. They were very long, andPierre, from joy, agitation, and embarrassment, was not in a state tounderstand what was being read. He managed to follow only the last wordsof the statutes and these remained in his mind."In our temples we recognize no other distinctions," read the GrandMaster, "but those between virtue and vice. Beware of making anydistinctions which may infringe equality. Fly to a brother's aid whoeverhe may be, exhort him who goeth astray, raise him that falleth, neverbear malice or enmity toward thy brother. Be kindly and courteous.Kindle in all hearts the flame of virtue. Share thy happiness with thyneighbor, and may envy never dim the purity of that bliss. Forgive thyenemy, do not avenge thyself except by doing him good. Thus fulfillingthe highest law thou shalt regain traces of the ancient dignity whichthou hast lost."He finished and, getting up, embraced and kissed Pierre, who, with tearsof joy in his eyes, looked round him, not knowing how to answer thecongratulations and greetings from acquaintances that met him on allsides. He acknowledged no acquaintances but saw in all these men onlybrothers, and burned with impatience to set to work with them.The Grand Master rapped with his mallet. All the Masons sat down intheir places, and one of them read an exhortation on the necessity ofhumility.The Grand Master proposed that the last duty should be performed, andthe distinguished dignitary who bore the title of "Collector of Alms"went round to all the brothers. Pierre would have liked to subscribe allhe had, but fearing that it might look like pride subscribed the sameamount as the others.The meeting was at an end, and on reaching home Pierre felt as if he hadreturned from a long journey on which he had spent dozens of years, hadbecome completely changed, and had quite left behind his former habitsand way of life.CHAPTER VThe day after he had been received into the Lodge, Pierre was sitting athome reading a book and trying to fathom the significance of the Square,one side of which symbolized God, another moral things, a third physicalthings, and the fourth a combination of these. Now and then hisattention wandered from the book and the Square and he formed inimagination a new plan of life. On the previous evening at the Lodge, hehad heard that a rumor of his duel had reached the Emperor and that itwould be wiser for him to leave Petersburg. Pierre proposed going to hisestates in the south and there attending to the welfare of his serfs. Hewas joyfully planning this new life, when Prince Vasili suddenly enteredthe room."My dear fellow, what have you been up to in Moscow? Why have youquarreled with Helene, mon cher? You are under a delusion," said PrinceVasili, as he entered. "I know all about it, and I can tell youpositively that Helene is as innocent before you as Christ was beforethe Jews."Pierre was about to reply, but Prince Vasili interrupted him."And why didn't you simply come straight to me as to a friend? I knowall about it and understand it all," he said. "You behaved as becomes aman who values his honor, perhaps too hastily, but we won't go intothat. But consider the position in which you are placing her and me inthe eyes of society, and even of the court," he added, lowering hisvoice. "She is living in Moscow and you are here. Remember, dear boy,"and he drew Pierre's arm downwards, "it is simply a misunderstanding. Iexpect you feel it so yourself. Let us write her a letter at once, andshe'll come here and all will be explained, or else, my dear boy, let metell you it's quite likely you'll have to suffer for it."Prince Vasili gave Pierre a significant look."I know from reliable sources that the Dowager Empress is taking a keeninterest in the whole affair. You know she is very gracious to Helene."Pierre tried several times to speak, but, on one hand, Prince Vasili didnot let him and, on the other, Pierre himself feared to begin to speakin the tone of decided refusal and disagreement in which he had firmlyresolved to answer his father-in-law. Moreover, the words of the masonicstatutes, "be kindly and courteous," recurred to him. He blinked, wentred, got up and sat down again, struggling with himself to do what wasfor him the most difficult thing in life--to say an unpleasant thing toa man's face, to say what the other, whoever he might be, did notexpect. He was so used to submitting to Prince Vasili's tone of carelessself-assurance that he felt he would be unable to withstand it now, buthe also felt that on what he said now his future depended--whether hewould follow the same old road, or that new path so attractively shownhim by the Masons, on which he firmly believed he would be reborn to anew life."Now, dear boy," said Prince Vasili playfully, "say 'yes,' and I'llwrite to her myself, and we will kill the fatted calf."But before Prince Vasili had finished his playful speech, Pierre,without looking at him, and with a kind of fury that made him like hisfather, muttered in a whisper:"Prince, I did not ask you here. Go, please go!" And he jumped up andopened the door for him."Go!" he repeated, amazed at himself and glad to see the look ofconfusion and fear that showed itself on Prince Vasili's face."What's the matter with you? Are you ill?""Go!" the quivering voice repeated. And Prince Vasili had to go withoutreceiving any explanation.A week later, Pierre, having taken leave of his new friends, the Masons,and leaving large sums of money with them for alms, went away to hisestates. His new brethren gave him letters to the Kiev and Odessa Masonsand promised to write to him and guide him in his new activity.CHAPTER VIThe duel between Pierre and Dolokhov was hushed up and, in spite of theEmperor's severity regarding duels at that time, neither the principalsnor their seconds suffered for it. But the story of the duel, confirmedby Pierre's rupture with his wife, was the talk of society. Pierre whohad been regarded with patronizing condescension when he was anillegitimate son, and petted and extolled when he was the best match inRussia, had sunk greatly in the esteem of society after his marriage--when the marriageable daughters and their mothers had nothing to hopefrom him--especially as he did not know how, and did not wish, to courtsociety's favor. Now he alone was blamed for what had happened, he wassaid to be insanely jealous and subject like his father to fits ofbloodthirsty rage. And when after Pierre's departure Helene returned toPetersburg, she was received by all her acquaintances not onlycordially, but even with a shade of deference due to her misfortune.When conversation turned on her husband Helene assumed a dignifiedexpression, which with characteristic tact she had acquired though shedid not understand its significance. This expression suggested that shehad resolved to endure her troubles uncomplainingly and that her husbandwas a cross laid upon her by God. Prince Vasili expressed his opinionmore openly. He shrugged his shoulders when Pierre was mentioned and,pointing to his forehead, remarked:"A bit touched--I always said so.""I said from the first," declared Anna Pavlovna referring to Pierre, "Isaid at the time and before anyone else" (she insisted on her priority)"that that senseless young man was spoiled by the depraved ideas ofthese days. I said so even at the time when everybody was in rapturesabout him, when he had just returned from abroad, and when, if youremember, he posed as a sort of Marat at one of my soirees. And how hasit ended? I was against this marriage even then and foretold all thathas happened."Anna Pavlovna continued to give on free evenings the same kind ofsoirees as before--such as she alone had the gift of arranging--at whichwas to be found "the cream of really good society, the bloom of theintellectual essence of Petersburg," as she herself put it. Besides thisrefined selection of society Anna Pavlovna's receptions were alsodistinguished by the fact that she always presented some new andinteresting person to the visitors and that nowhere else was the stateof the political thermometer of legitimate Petersburg court society sodearly and distinctly indicated.Toward the end of 1806, when all the sad details of Napoleon'sdestruction of the Prussian army at Jena and Auerstadt and the surrenderof most of the Prussian fortresses had been received, when our troopshad already entered Prussia and our second war with Napoleon wasbeginning, Anna Pavlovna gave one of her soirees. The "cream of reallygood society" consisted of the fascinating Helene, forsaken by herhusband, Mortemart, the delightful Prince Hippolyte who had justreturned from Vienna, two diplomatists, the old aunt, a young manreferred to in that drawing room as "a man of great merit" (un homme debeaucoup de merite), a newly appointed maid of honor and her mother, andseveral other less noteworthy persons.The novelty Anna Pavlovna was setting before her guests that evening wasBoris Drubetskoy, who had just arrived as a special messenger from thePrussian army and was aide-de-camp to a very important personage.The temperature shown by the political thermometer to the company thatevening was this:"Whatever the European sovereigns and commanders may do to countenanceBonaparte, and to cause me, and us in general, annoyance andmortification, our opinion of Bonaparte cannot alter. We shall not ceaseto express our sincere views on that subject, and can only say to theKing of Prussia and others: 'So much the worse for you. Tu l'as voulu,George Dandin,' that's all we have to say about it!"When Boris, who was to be served up to the guests, entered the drawingroom, almost all the company had assembled, and the conversation, guidedby Anna Pavlovna, was about our diplomatic relations with Austria andthe hope of an alliance with her.Boris, grown more manly and looking fresh, rosy and self-possessed,entered the drawing room elegantly dressed in the uniform of an aide-de-camp and was duly conducted to pay his respects to the aunt and thenbrought back to the general circle.Anna Pavlovna gave him her shriveled hand to kiss and introduced him toseveral persons whom he did not know, giving him a whispered descriptionof each."Prince Hippolyte Kuragin, M. Krug, the charge d'affaires fromCopenhagen--a profound intellect," and simply, "Mr. Shitov--a man ofgreat merit"--this of the man usually so described.Thanks to Anna Mikhaylovna's efforts, his own tastes, and thepeculiarities of his reserved nature, Boris had managed during hisservice to place himself very advantageously. He was aide-de-camp to avery important personage, had been sent on a very important mission toPrussia, and had just returned from there as a special messenger. He hadbecome thoroughly conversant with that unwritten code with which he hadbeen so pleased at Olmutz and according to which an ensign might rankincomparably higher than a general, and according to which what wasneeded for success in the service was not effort or work, or courage, orperseverance, but only the knowledge of how to get on with those who cangrant rewards, and he was himself often surprised at the rapidity of hissuccess and at the inability of others to understand these things. Inconsequence of this discovery his whole manner of life, all hisrelations with old friends, all his plans for his future, werecompletely altered. He was not rich, but would spend his last groat tobe better dressed than others, and would rather deprive himself of manypleasures than allow himself to be seen in a shabby equipage or appearin the streets of Petersburg in an old uniform. He made friends with andsought the acquaintance of only those above him in position and whocould therefore be of use to him. He liked Petersburg and despisedMoscow. The remembrance of the Rostovs' house and of his childish lovefor Natasha was unpleasant to him and he had not once been to see theRostovs since the day of his departure for the army. To be in AnnaPavlovna's drawing room he considered an important step up in theservice, and he at once understood his role, letting his hostess makeuse of whatever interest he had to offer. He himself carefully scannedeach face, appraising the possibilities of establishing intimacy witheach of those present, and the advantages that might accrue. He took theseat indicated to him beside the fair Helene and listened to the generalconversation."Vienna considers the bases of the proposed treaty so unattainable thatnot even a continuity of most brilliant successes would secure them, andshe doubts the means we have of gaining them. That is the actual phraseused by the Vienna cabinet," said the Danish charge d'affaires."The doubt is flattering," said "the man of profound intellect," with asubtle smile."We must distinguish between the Vienna cabinet and the Emperor ofAustria," said Mortemart. "The Emperor of Austria can never have thoughtof such a thing, it is only the cabinet that says it.""Ah, my dear vicomte," put in Anna Pavlovna, "L'Urope" (for some reasonshe called it Urope as if that were a specially refined Frenchpronunciation which she could allow herself when conversing with aFrenchman), "L'Urope ne sera jamais notre alliee sincere." ** "Europe will never be our sincere ally."After that Anna Pavlovna led up to the courage and firmness of the Kingof Prussia, in order to draw Boris into the conversation.Boris listened attentively to each of the speakers, awaiting his turn,but managed meanwhile to look round repeatedly at his neighbor, thebeautiful Helene, whose eyes several times met those of the handsomeyoung aide-de-camp with a smile.Speaking of the position of Prussia, Anna Pavlovna very naturally askedBoris to tell them about his journey to Glogau and in what state hefound the Prussian army. Boris, speaking with deliberation, told them inpure, correct French many interesting details about the armies and thecourt, carefully abstaining from expressing an opinion of his own aboutthe facts he was recounting. For some time he engrossed the generalattention, and Anna Pavlovna felt that the novelty she had served up wasreceived with pleasure by all her visitors. The greatest attention ofall to Boris' narrative was shown by Helene. She asked him severalquestions about his journey and seemed greatly interested in the stateof the Prussian army. As soon as he had finished she turned to him withher usual smile."You absolutely must come and see me," she said in a tone that impliedthat, for certain considerations he could not know of, this wasabsolutely necessary."On Tuesday between eight and nine. It will give me great pleasure."Boris promised to fulfill her wish and was about to begin a conversationwith her, when Anna Pavlovna called him away on the pretext that heraunt wished to hear him."You know her husband, of course?" said Anna Pavlovna, closing her eyesand indicating Helene with a sorrowful gesture. "Ah, she is such anunfortunate and charming woman! Don't mention him before her--pleasedon't! It is too painful for her!"CHAPTER VIIWhen Boris and Anna Pavlovna returned to the others Prince Hippolyte hadthe ear of the company.Bending forward in his armchair he said: "Le Roi de Prusse!" and havingsaid this laughed. Everyone turned toward him."Le Roi de Prusse?" Hippolyte said interrogatively, again laughing, andthen calmly and seriously sat back in his chair. Anna Pavlovna waitedfor him to go on, but as he seemed quite decided to say no more shebegan to tell of how at Potsdam the impious Bonaparte had stolen thesword of Frederick the Great."It is the sword of Frederick the Great which I..." she began, butHippolyte interrupted her with the words: "Le Roi de Prusse..." andagain, as soon as all turned toward him, excused himself and said nomore.Anna Pavlovna frowned. Mortemart, Hippolyte's friend, addressed himfirmly."Come now, what about your Roi de Prusse?"Hippolyte laughed as if ashamed of laughing."Oh, it's nothing. I only wished to say..." (he wanted to repeat a jokehe had heard in Vienna and which he had been trying all that evening toget in) "I only wished to say that we are wrong to fight pour le Roi dePrusse!"Boris smiled circumspectly, so that it might be taken as ironical orappreciative according to the way the joke was received. Everybodylaughed."Your joke is too bad, it's witty but unjust," said Anna Pavlovna,shaking her little shriveled finger at him."We are not fighting pour le Roi de Prusse, but for right principles.Oh, that wicked Prince Hippolyte!" she said.The conversation did not flag all evening and turned chiefly on thepolitical news. It became particularly animated toward the end of theevening when the rewards bestowed by the Emperor were mentioned."You know N-- N-- received a snuffbox with the portrait last year?" said"the man of profound intellect." "Why shouldn't S-- S-- get the samedistinction?""Pardon me! A snuffbox with the Emperor's portrait is a reward but not adistinction," said the diplomatist--"a gift, rather.""There are precedents, I may mention Schwarzenberg.""It's impossible," replied another."Will you bet? The ribbon of the order is a different matter...."When everybody rose to go, Helene who had spoken very little all theevening again turned to Boris, asking him in a tone of caressingsignificant command to come to her on Tuesday."It is of great importance to me," she said, turning with a smile towardAnna Pavlovna, and Anna Pavlovna, with the same sad smile with which shespoke of her exalted patroness, supported Helene's wish.It seemed as if from some words Boris had spoken that evening about thePrussian army, Helene had suddenly found it necessary to see him. Sheseemed to promise to explain that necessity to him when he came onTuesday.But on Tuesday evening, having come to Helene's splendid salon, Borisreceived no clear explanation of why it had been necessary for him tocome. There were other guests and the countess talked little to him, andonly as he kissed her hand on taking leave said unexpectedly and in awhisper, with a strangely unsmiling face: "Come to dinner tomorrow... inthe evening. You must come.... Come!"During that stay in Petersburg, Boris became an intimate in thecountess' house.CHAPTER VIIIThe war was flaming up and nearing the Russian frontier. Everywhere oneheard curses on Bonaparte, "the enemy of mankind." Militiamen andrecruits were being enrolled in the villages, and from the seat of warcame contradictory news, false as usual and therefore variouslyinterpreted. The life of old Prince Bolkonski, Prince Andrew, andPrincess Mary had greatly changed since 1805.In 1806 the old prince was made one of the eight commanders in chiefthen appointed to supervise the enrollment decreed throughout Russia.Despite the weakness of age, which had become particularly noticeablesince the time when he thought his son had been killed, he did not thinkit right to refuse a duty to which he had been appointed by the Emperorhimself, and this fresh opportunity for action gave him new energy andstrength. He was continually traveling through the three provincesentrusted to him, was pedantic in the fulfillment of his duties, severeto cruel with his subordinates, and went into everything down to theminutest details himself. Princess Mary had ceased taking lessons inmathematics from her father, and when the old prince was at home went tohis study with the wet nurse and little Prince Nicholas (as hisgrandfather called him). The baby Prince Nicholas lived with his wetnurse and nurse Savishna in the late princess' rooms and Princess Maryspent most of the day in the nursery, taking a mother's place to herlittle nephew as best she could. Mademoiselle Bourienne, too, seemedpassionately fond of the boy, and Princess Mary often deprived herselfto give her friend the pleasure of dandling the little angel--as shecalled her nephew--and playing with him.Near the altar of the church at Bald Hills there was a chapel over thetomb of the little princess, and in this chapel was a marble monumentbrought from Italy, representing an angel with outspread wings ready tofly upwards. The angel's upper lip was slightly raised as though aboutto smile, and once on coming out of the chapel Prince Andrew andPrincess Mary admitted to one another that the angel's face remindedthem strangely of the little princess. But what was still stranger,though of this Prince Andrew said nothing to his sister, was that in theexpression the sculptor had happened to give the angel's face, PrinceAndrew read the same mild reproach he had read on the face of his deadwife: "Ah, why have you done this to me?"Soon after Prince Andrew's return the old prince made over to him alarge estate, Bogucharovo, about twenty-five miles from Bald Hills.Partly because of the depressing memories associated with Bald Hills,partly because Prince Andrew did not always feel equal to bearing withhis father's peculiarities, and partly because he needed solitude,Prince Andrew made use of Bogucharovo, began building and spent most ofhis time there.After the Austerlitz campaign Prince Andrew had firmly resolved not tocontinue his military service, and when the war recommenced andeverybody had to serve, he took a post under his father in therecruitment so as to avoid active service. The old prince and his sonseemed to have changed roles since the campaign of 1805. The old man,roused by activity, expected the best results from the new campaign,while Prince Andrew on the contrary, taking no part in the war andsecretly regretting this, saw only the dark side.On February 26, 1807, the old prince set off on one of his circuits.Prince Andrew remained at Bald Hills as usual during his father'sabsence. Little Nicholas had been unwell for four days. The coachman whohad driven the old prince to town returned bringing papers and lettersfor Prince Andrew.Not finding the young prince in his study the valet went with theletters to Princess Mary's apartments, but did not find him there. Hewas told that the prince had gone to the nursery."If you please, your excellency, Petrusha has brought some papers," saidone of the nursemaids to Prince Andrew who was sitting on a child'slittle chair while, frowning and with trembling hands, he poured dropsfrom a medicine bottle into a wineglass half full of water."What is it?" he said crossly, and, his hand shaking unintentionally, hepoured too many drops into the glass. He threw the mixture onto thefloor and asked for some more water. The maid brought it.There were in the room a child's cot, two boxes, two armchairs, a table,a child's table, and the little chair on which Prince Andrew wassitting. The curtains were drawn, and a single candle was burning on thetable, screened by a bound music book so that the light did not fall onthe cot."My dear," said Princess Mary, addressing her brother from beside thecot where she was standing, "better wait a bit... later...""Oh, leave off, you always talk nonsense and keep putting things off--and this is what comes of it!" said Prince Andrew in an exasperatedwhisper, evidently meaning to wound his sister."My dear, really... it's better not to wake him... he's asleep," saidthe princess in a tone of entreaty.Prince Andrew got up and went on tiptoe up to the little bed, wineglassin hand."Perhaps we'd really better not wake him," he said hesitating."As you please... really... I think so... but as you please," saidPrincess Mary, evidently intimidated and confused that her opinion hadprevailed. She drew her brother's attention to the maid who was callinghim in a whisper.It was the second night that neither of them had slept, watching the boywho was in a high fever. These last days, mistrusting their householddoctor and expecting another for whom they had sent to town, they hadbeen trying first one remedy and then another. Worn out by sleeplessnessand anxiety they threw their burden of sorrow on one another andreproached and disputed with each other."Petrusha has come with papers from your father," whispered the maid.Prince Andrew went out."Devil take them!" he muttered, and after listening to the verbalinstructions his father had sent and taking the correspondence and hisfather's letter, he returned to the nursery."Well?" he asked."Still the same. Wait, for heaven's sake. Karl Ivanich always says thatsleep is more important than anything," whispered Princess Mary with asigh.Prince Andrew went up to the child and felt him. He was burning hot."Confound you and your Karl Ivanich!" He took the glass with the dropsand again went up to the cot."Andrew, don't!" said Princess Mary.But he scowled at her angrily though also with suffering in his eyes,and stooped glass in hand over the infant."But I wish it," he said. "I beg you--give it him!"Princess Mary shrugged her shoulders but took the glass submissively andcalling the nurse began giving the medicine. The child screamedhoarsely. Prince Andrew winced and, clutching his head, went out and satdown on a sofa in the next room.He still had all the letters in his hand. Opening them mechanically hebegan reading. The old prince, now and then using abbreviations, wrotein his large elongated hand on blue paper as follows:Have just this moment received by special messenger very joyful news--ifit's not false. Bennigsen seems to have obtained a complete victory overBuonaparte at Eylau. In Petersburg everyone is rejoicing, and therewards sent to the army are innumerable. Though he is a German--Icongratulate him! I can't make out what the commander at Korchevo--acertain Khandrikov--is up to; till now the additional men and provisionshave not arrived. Gallop off to him at once and say I'll have his headoff if everything is not here in a week. Have received another letterabout the Preussisch-Eylau battle from Petenka--he took part in it--andit's all true. When mischief-makers don't meddle even a German beatsBuonaparte. He is said to be fleeing in great disorder. Mind you gallopoff to Korchevo without delay and carry out instructions!Prince Andrew sighed and broke the seal of another envelope. It was aclosely written letter of two sheets from Bilibin. He folded it upwithout reading it and reread his father's letter, ending with thewords: "Gallop off to Korchevo and carry out instructions!""No, pardon me, I won't go now till the child is better," thought he,going to the door and looking into the nursery.Princess Mary was still standing by the cot, gently rocking the baby."Ah yes, and what else did he say that's unpleasant?" thought PrinceAndrew, recalling his father's letter. "Yes, we have gained a victoryover Bonaparte, just when I'm not serving. Yes, yes, he's always pokingfun at me.... Ah, well! Let him!" And he began reading Bilibin's letterwhich was written in French. He read without understanding half of it,read only to forget, if but for a moment, what he had too long beenthinking of so painfully to the exclusion of all else.CHAPTER IXBilibin was now at army headquarters in a diplomatic capacity, andthough he wrote in French and used French jests and French idioms, hedescribed the whole campaign with a fearless self-censure and self-derision genuinely Russian. Bilibin wrote that the obligation ofdiplomatic discretion tormented him, and he was happy to have in PrinceAndrew a reliable correspondent to whom he could pour out the bile hehad accumulated at the sight of all that was being done in the army. Theletter was old, having been written before the battle at Preussisch-Eylau."Since the day of our brilliant success at Austerlitz," wrote Bilibin,"as you know, my dear prince, I never leave headquarters. I havecertainly acquired a taste for war, and it is just as well for me; whatI have seen during these last three months is incredible."I begin ab ovo. 'The enemy of the human race,' as you know, attacks thePrussians. The Prussians are our faithful allies who have only betrayedus three times in three years. We take up their cause, but it turns outthat 'the enemy of the human race' pays no heed to our fine speeches andin his rude and savage way throws himself on the Prussians withoutgiving them time to finish the parade they had begun, and in two twistsof the hand he breaks them to smithereens and installs himself in thepalace at Potsdam."'I most ardently desire,' writes the King of Prussia to Bonaparte,'that Your Majesty should be received and treated in my palace in amanner agreeable to yourself, and in so far as circumstances allowed, Ihave hastened to take all steps to that end. May I have succeeded!' ThePrussian generals pride themselves on being polite to the French and laydown their arms at the first demand."The head of the garrison at Glogau, with ten thousand men, asks theKing of Prussia what he is to do if he is summoned to surrender.... Allthis is absolutely true."In short, hoping to settle matters by taking up a warlike attitude, itturns out that we have landed ourselves in war, and what is more, in waron our own frontiers, with and for the King of Prussia. We haveeverything in perfect order, only one little thing is lacking, namely, acommander in chief. As it was considered that the Austerlitz successmight have been more decisive had the commander-in-chief not been soyoung, all our octogenarians were reviewed, and of Prozorovski andKamenski the latter was preferred. The general comes to us, Suvorov-like, in a kibitka, and is received with acclamations of joy andtriumph."On the 4th, the first courier arrives from Petersburg. The mails aretaken to the field marshal's room, for he likes to do everythinghimself. I am called in to help sort the letters and take those meantfor us. The field marshal looks on and waits for letters addressed tohim. We search, but none are to be found. The field marshal growsimpatient and sets to work himself and finds letters from the Emperor toCount T., Prince V., and others. Then he bursts into one of his wildfuries and rages at everyone and everything, seizes the letters, opensthem, and reads those from the Emperor addressed to others. 'Ah! Sothat's the way they treat me! No confidence in me! Ah, ordered to keepan eye on me! Very well then! Get along with you!' So he writes thefamous order of the day to General Bennigsen:'I am wounded and cannot ride and consequently cannot command the army.You have brought your army corps to Pultusk, routed: here it is exposed,and without fuel or forage, so something must be done, and, as youyourself reported to Count Buxhowden yesterday, you must think ofretreating to our frontier--which do today.'"'From all my riding,' he writes to the Emperor, 'I have got a saddlesore which, coming after all my previous journeys, quite prevents myriding and commanding so vast an army, so I have passed on the commandto the general next in seniority, Count Buxhowden, having sent him mywhole staff and all that belongs to it, advising him if there is a lackof bread, to move farther into the interior of Prussia, for only oneday's ration of bread remains, and in some regiments none at all, asreported by the division commanders, Ostermann and Sedmoretzki, and allthat the peasants had has been eaten up. I myself will remain inhospital at Ostrolenka till I recover. In regard to which I humblysubmit my report, with the information that if the army remains in itspresent bivouac another fortnight there will not be a healthy man leftin it by spring."'Grant leave to retire to his country seat to an old man who is alreadyin any case dishonored by being unable to fulfill the great and glorioustask for which he was chosen. I shall await your most graciouspermission here in hospital, that I may not have to play the part of asecretary rather than commander in the army. My removal from the armydoes not produce the slightest stir--a blind man has left it. There arethousands such as I in Russia.'"The field marshal is angry with the Emperor and he punishes us all,isn't it logical?"This is the first act. Those that follow are naturally increasinglyinteresting and entertaining. After the field marshal's departure itappears that we are within sight of the enemy and must give battle.Buxhowden is commander-in-chief by seniority, but General Bennigsen doesnot quite see it; more particularly as it is he and his corps who arewithin sight of the enemy and he wishes to profit by the opportunity tofight a battle 'on his own hand' as the Germans say. He does so. This isthe battle of Pultusk, which is considered a great victory but in myopinion was nothing of the kind. We civilians, as you know, have a verybad way of deciding whether a battle was won or lost. Those who retreatafter a battle have lost it is what we say; and according to that it iswe who lost the battle of Pultusk. In short, we retreat after the battlebut send a courier to Petersburg with news of a victory, and GeneralBennigsen, hoping to receive from Petersburg the post of commander inchief as a reward for his victory, does not give up the command of thearmy to General Buxhowden. During this interregnum we begin a veryoriginal and interesting series of maneuvers. Our aim is no longer, asit should be, to avoid or attack the enemy, but solely to avoid GeneralBuxhowden who by right of seniority should be our chief. Soenergetically do we pursue this aim that after crossing an unfordableriver we burn the bridges to separate ourselves from our enemy, who atthe moment is not Bonaparte but Buxhowden. General Buxhowden was all butattacked and captured by a superior enemy force as a result of one ofthese maneuvers that enabled us to escape him. Buxhowden pursues us--wescuttle. He hardly crosses the river to our side before we recross tothe other. At last our enemy, Buxhowden, catches us and attacks. Bothgenerals are angry, and the result is a challenge on Buxhowden's partand an epileptic fit on Bennigsen's. But at the critical moment thecourier who carried the news of our victory at Pultusk to Petersburgreturns bringing our appointment as commander-in-chief, and our firstfoe, Buxhowden, is vanquished; we can now turn our thoughts to thesecond, Bonaparte. But as it turns out, just at that moment a thirdenemy rises before us--namely the Orthodox Russian soldiers, loudlydemanding bread, meat, biscuits, fodder, and whatnot! The stores areempty, the roads impassable. The Orthodox begin looting, and in a way ofwhich our last campaign can give you no idea. Half the regiments formbands and scour the countryside and put everything to fire and sword.The inhabitants are totally ruined, the hospitals overflow with sick,and famine is everywhere. Twice the marauders even attack ourheadquarters, and the commander-in-chief has to ask for a battalion todisperse them. During one of these attacks they carried off my emptyportmanteau and my dressing gown. The Emperor proposes to give allcommanders of divisions the right to shoot marauders, but I much fearthis will oblige one half the army to shoot the other."At first Prince Andrew read with his eyes only, but after a while, inspite of himself (although he knew how far it was safe to trustBilibin), what he had read began to interest him more and more. When hehad read thus far, he crumpled the letter up and threw it away. It wasnot what he had read that vexed him, but the fact that the life outthere in which he had now no part could perturb him. He shut his eyes,rubbed his forehead as if to rid himself of all interest in what he hadread, and listened to what was passing in the nursery. Suddenly hethought he heard a strange noise through the door. He was seized withalarm lest something should have happened to the child while he wasreading the letter. He went on tiptoe to the nursery door and opened it.Just as he went in he saw that the nurse was hiding something from himwith a scared look and that Princess Mary was no longer by the cot."My dear," he heard what seemed to him her despairing whisper behindhim.As often happens after long sleeplessness and long anxiety, he wasseized by an unreasoning panic--it occurred to him that the child wasdead. All that he saw and heard seemed to confirm this terror."All is over," he thought, and a cold sweat broke out on his forehead.He went to the cot in confusion, sure that he would find it empty andthat the nurse had been hiding the dead baby. He drew the curtain asideand for some time his frightened, restless eyes could not find the baby.At last he saw him: the rosy boy had tossed about till he lay across thebed with his head lower than the pillow, and was smacking his lips inhis sleep and breathing evenly.Prince Andrew was as glad to find the boy like that, as if he hadalready lost him. He bent over him and, as his sister had taught him,tried with his lips whether the child was still feverish. The softforehead was moist. Prince Andrew touched the head with his hand; eventhe hair was wet, so profusely had the child perspired. He was not dead,but evidently the crisis was over and he was convalescent. Prince Andrewlonged to snatch up, to squeeze, to hold to his heart, this helplesslittle creature, but dared not do so. He stood over him, gazing at hishead and at the little arms and legs which showed under the blanket. Heheard a rustle behind him and a shadow appeared under the curtain of thecot. He did not look round, but still gazing at the infant's facelistened to his regular breathing. The dark shadow was Princess Mary,who had come up to the cot with noiseless steps, lifted the curtain, anddropped it again behind her. Prince Andrew recognized her withoutlooking and held out his hand to her. She pressed it."He has perspired," said Prince Andrew."I was coming to tell you so."The child moved slightly in his sleep, smiled, and rubbed his foreheadagainst the pillow.Prince Andrew looked at his sister. In the dim shadow of the curtain herluminous eyes shone more brightly than usual from the tears of joy thatwere in them. She leaned over to her brother and kissed him, slightlycatching the curtain of the cot. Each made the other a warning gestureand stood still in the dim light beneath the curtain as if not wishingto leave that seclusion where they three were shut off from all theworld. Prince Andrew was the first to move away, ruffling his hairagainst the muslin of the curtain."Yes, this is the one thing left me now," he said with a sigh.CHAPTER XSoon after his admission to the masonic Brotherhood, Pierre went to theKiev province, where he had the greatest number of serfs, taking withhim full directions which he had written down for his own guidance as towhat he should do on his estates.When he reached Kiev he sent for all his stewards to the head office andexplained to them his intentions and wishes. He told them that stepswould be taken immediately to free his serfs--and that till then theywere not to be overburdened with labor, women while nursing their babieswere not to be sent to work, assistance was to be given to the serfs,punishments were to be admonitory and not corporal, and hospitals,asylums, and schools were to be established on all the estates. Some ofthe stewards (there were semiliterate foremen among them) listened withalarm, supposing these words to mean that the young count was displeasedwith their management and embezzlement of money, some after their firstfright were amused by Pierre's lisp and the new words they had not heardbefore, others simply enjoyed hearing how the master talked, while thecleverest among them, including the chief steward, understood from thisspeech how they could best handle the master for their own ends.The chief steward expressed great sympathy with Pierre's intentions, butremarked that besides these changes it would be necessary to go into thegeneral state of affairs which was far from satisfactory.Despite Count Bezukhov's enormous wealth, since he had come into anincome which was said to amount to five hundred thousand rubles a year,Pierre felt himself far poorer than when his father had made him anallowance of ten thousand rubles. He had a dim perception of thefollowing budget:About 80,000 went in payments on all the estates to the Land Bank, about30,000 went for the upkeep of the estate near Moscow, the town house,and the allowance to the three princesses; about 15,000 was given inpensions and the same amount for asylums; 150,000 alimony was sent tothe countess; about 70,000 went for interest on debts. The building of anew church, previously begun, had cost about 10,000 in each of the lasttwo years, and he did not know how the rest, about 100,000 rubles, wasspent, and almost every year he was obliged to borrow. Besides this thechief steward wrote every year telling him of fires and bad harvests, orof the necessity of rebuilding factories and workshops. So the firsttask Pierre had to face was one for which he had very little aptitude orinclination--practical business.He discussed estate affairs every day with his chief steward. But hefelt that this did not forward matters at all. He felt that theseconsultations were detached from real affairs and did not link up withthem or make them move. On the one hand, the chief steward put the stateof things to him in the very worst light, pointing out the necessity ofpaying off the debts and undertaking new activities with serf labor, towhich Pierre did not agree. On the other hand, Pierre demanded thatsteps should be taken to liberate the serfs, which the steward met byshowing the necessity of first paying off the loans from the Land Bank,and the consequent impossibility of a speedy emancipation.The steward did not say it was quite impossible, but suggested sellingthe forests in the province of Kostroma, the land lower down the river,and the Crimean estate, in order to make it possible: all of whichoperations according to him were connected with such complicatedmeasures--the removal of injunctions, petitions, permits, and so on--that Pierre became quite bewildered and only replied:"Yes, yes, do so."Pierre had none of the practical persistence that would have enabled himto attend to the business himself and so he disliked it and only triedto pretend to the steward that he was attending to it. The steward forhis part tried to pretend to the count that he considered theseconsultations very valuable for the proprietor and troublesome tohimself.In Kiev Pierre found some people he knew, and strangers hastened to makehis acquaintance and joyfully welcomed the rich newcomer, the largestlandowner of the province. Temptations to Pierre's greatest weakness--the one to which he had confessed when admitted to the Lodge--were sostrong that he could not resist them. Again whole days, weeks, andmonths of his life passed in as great a rush and were as much occupiedwith evening parties, dinners, lunches, and balls, giving him no timefor reflection, as in Petersburg. Instead of the new life he had hopedto lead he still lived the old life, only in new surroundings.Of the three precepts of Freemasonry Pierre realized that he did notfulfill the one which enjoined every Mason to set an example of morallife, and that of the seven virtues he lacked two--morality and the loveof death. He consoled himself with the thought that he fulfilled anotherof the precepts--that of reforming the human race--and had othervirtues--love of his neighbor, and especially generosity.In the spring of 1807 he decided to return to Petersburg. On the way heintended to visit all his estates and see for himself how far his ordershad been carried out and in what state were the serfs whom God hadentrusted to his care and whom he intended to benefit.The chief steward, who considered the young count's attempts almostinsane--unprofitable to himself, to the count, and to the serfs--madesome concessions. Continuing to represent the liberation of the serfs asimpracticable, he arranged for the erection of large buildings--schools,hospitals, and asylums--on all the estates before the master arrived.Everywhere preparations were made not for ceremonious welcomes (which heknew Pierre would not like), but for just such gratefully religiousones, with offerings of icons and the bread and salt of hospitality, as,according to his understanding of his master, would touch and deludehim.The southern spring, the comfortable rapid traveling in a Viennacarriage, and the solitude of the road, all had a gladdening effect onPierre. The estates he had not before visited were each more picturesquethan the other; the serfs everywhere seemed thriving and touchinglygrateful for the benefits conferred on them. Everywhere were receptions,which though they embarrassed Pierre awakened a joyful feeling in thedepth of his heart. In one place the peasants presented him with breadand salt and an icon of Saint Peter and Saint Paul, asking permission,as a mark of their gratitude for the benefits he had conferred on them,to build a new chantry to the church at their own expense in honor ofPeter and Paul, his patron saints. In another place the women withinfants in arms met him to thank him for releasing them from hard work.On a third estate the priest, bearing a cross, came to meet himsurrounded by children whom, by the count's generosity, he wasinstructing in reading, writing, and religion. On all his estates Pierresaw with his own eyes brick buildings erected or in course of erection,all on one plan, for hospitals, schools, and almshouses, which were soonto be opened. Everywhere he saw the stewards' accounts, according towhich the serfs' manorial labor had been diminished, and heard thetouching thanks of deputations of serfs in their full-skirted bluecoats.What Pierre did not know was that the place where they presented himwith bread and salt and wished to build a chantry in honor of Peter andPaul was a market village where a fair was held on St. Peter's day, andthat the richest peasants (who formed the deputation) had begun thechantry long before, but that nine tenths of the peasants in thatvillages were in a state of the greatest poverty. He did not know thatsince the nursing mothers were no longer sent to work on his land, theydid still harder work on their own land. He did not know that the priestwho met him with the cross oppressed the peasants by his exactions, andthat the pupils' parents wept at having to let him take their childrenand secured their release by heavy payments. He did not know that thebrick buildings, built to plan, were being built by serfs whose manoriallabor was thus increased, though lessened on paper. He did not know thatwhere the steward had shown him in the accounts that the serfs' paymentshad been diminished by a third, their obligatory manorial work had beenincreased by a half. And so Pierre was delighted with his visit to hisestates and quite recovered the philanthropic mood in which he had leftPetersburg, and wrote enthusiastic letters to his "brother-instructor"as he called the Grand Master."How easy it is, how little effort it needs, to do so much good,"thought Pierre, "and how little attention we pay to it!"He was pleased at the gratitude he received, but felt abashed atreceiving it. This gratitude reminded him of how much more he might dofor these simple, kindly people.The chief steward, a very stupid but cunning man who saw perfectlythrough the naive and intelligent count and played with him as with atoy, seeing the effect these prearranged receptions had on Pierre,pressed him still harder with proofs of the impossibility and above allthe uselessness of freeing the serfs, who were quite happy as it was.Pierre in his secret soul agreed with the steward that it would bedifficult to imagine happier people, and that God only knew what wouldhappen to them when they were free, but he insisted, though reluctantly,on what he thought right. The steward promised to do all in his power tocarry out the count's wishes, seeing clearly that not only would thecount never be able to find out whether all measures had been taken forthe sale of the land and forests and to release them from the Land Bank,but would probably never even inquire and would never know that thenewly erected buildings were standing empty and that the serfs continuedto give in money and work all that other people's serfs gave--that is tosay, all that could be got out of them.CHAPTER XIReturning from his journey through South Russia in the happiest state ofmind, Pierre carried out an intention he had long had of visiting hisfriend Bolkonski, whom he had not seen for two years.Bogucharovo lay in a flat uninteresting part of the country among fieldsand forests of fir and birch, which were partly cut down. The house laybehind a newly dug pond filled with water to the brink and with banksstill bare of grass. It was at the end of a village that stretched alongthe highroad in the midst of a young copse in which were a few firtrees.The homestead consisted of a threshing floor, outhouses, stables, abathhouse, a lodge, and a large brick house with semicircular facadestill in course of construction. Round the house was a garden newly laidout. The fences and gates were new and solid; two fire pumps and a watercart, painted green, stood in a shed; the paths were straight, thebridges were strong and had handrails. Everything bore an impress oftidiness and good management. Some domestic serfs Pierre met, in replyto inquiries as to where the prince lived, pointed out a small newlybuilt lodge close to the pond. Anton, a man who had looked after PrinceAndrew in his boyhood, helped Pierre out of his carriage, said that theprince was at home, and showed him into a clean little anteroom.Pierre was struck by the modesty of the small though clean house afterthe brilliant surroundings in which he had last met his friend inPetersburg.He quickly entered the small reception room with its still-unplasteredwooden walls redolent of pine, and would have gone farther, but Antonran ahead on tiptoe and knocked at a door."Well, what is it?" came a sharp, unpleasant voice."A visitor," answered Anton."Ask him to wait," and the sound was heard of a chair being pushed back.Pierre went with rapid steps to the door and suddenly came face to facewith Prince Andrew, who came out frowning and looking old. Pierreembraced him and lifting his spectacles kissed his friend on the cheekand looked at him closely."Well, I did not expect you, I am very glad," said Prince Andrew.Pierre said nothing; he looked fixedly at his friend with surprise. Hewas struck by the change in him. His words were kindly and there was asmile on his lips and face, but his eyes were dull and lifeless and inspite of his evident wish to do so he could not give them a joyous andglad sparkle. Prince Andrew had grown thinner, paler, and more manly-looking, but what amazed and estranged Pierre till he got used to itwere his inertia and a wrinkle on his brow indicating prolongedconcentration on some one thought.As is usually the case with people meeting after a prolonged separation,it was long before their conversation could settle on anything. They putquestions and gave brief replies about things they knew ought to betalked over at length. At last the conversation gradually settled onsome of the topics at first lightly touched on: their past life, plansfor the future, Pierre's journeys and occupations, the war, and so on.The preoccupation and despondency which Pierre had noticed in hisfriend's look was now still more clearly expressed in the smile withwhich he listened to Pierre, especially when he spoke with joyfulanimation of the past or the future. It was as if Prince Andrew wouldhave liked to sympathize with what Pierre was saying, but could not. Thelatter began to feel that it was in bad taste to speak of hisenthusiasms, dreams, and hopes of happiness or goodness, in PrinceAndrew's presence. He was ashamed to express his new masonic views,which had been particularly revived and strengthened by his late tour.He checked himself, fearing to seem naive, yet he felt an irresistibledesire to show his friend as soon as possible that he was now a quitedifferent, and better, Pierre than he had been in Petersburg."I can't tell you how much I have lived through since then. I hardlyknow myself again.""Yes, we have altered much, very much, since then," said Prince Andrew."Well, and you? What are your plans?""Plans!" repeated Prince Andrew ironically. "My plans?" he said, as ifastonished at the word. "Well, you see, I'm building. I mean to settlehere altogether next year...."Pierre looked silently and searchingly into Prince Andrew's face, whichhad grown much older."No, I meant to ask..." Pierre began, but Prince Andrew interrupted him."But why talk of me?... Talk to me, yes, tell me about your travels andall you have been doing on your estates."Pierre began describing what he had done on his estates, trying as faras possible to conceal his own part in the improvements that had beenmade. Prince Andrew several times prompted Pierre's story of what he hadbeen doing, as though it were all an old-time story, and he listened notonly without interest but even as if ashamed of what Pierre was tellinghim.Pierre felt uncomfortable and even depressed in his friend's company andat last became silent."I'll tell you what, my dear fellow," said Prince Andrew, who evidentlyalso felt depressed and constrained with his visitor, "I am onlybivouacking here and have just come to look round. I am going back to mysister today. I will introduce you to her. But of course you know heralready," he said, evidently trying to entertain a visitor with whom henow found nothing in common. "We will go after dinner. And would you nowlike to look round my place?"They went out and walked about till dinnertime, talking of the politicalnews and common acquaintances like people who do not know each otherintimately. Prince Andrew spoke with some animation and interest only ofthe new homestead he was constructing and its buildings, but even here,while on the scaffolding, in the midst of a talk explaining the futurearrangements of the house, he interrupted himself:"However, this is not at all interesting. Let us have dinner, and thenwe'll set off."At dinner, conversation turned on Pierre's marriage."I was very much surprised when I heard of it," said Prince Andrew.Pierre blushed, as he always did when it was mentioned, and saidhurriedly: "I will tell you some time how it all happened. But you knowit is all over, and forever.""Forever?" said Prince Andrew. "Nothing's forever.""But you know how it all ended, don't you? You heard of the duel?""And so you had to go through that too!""One thing I thank God for is that I did not kill that man," saidPierre."Why so?" asked Prince Andrew. "To kill a vicious dog is a very goodthing really.""No, to kill a man is bad--wrong.""Why is it wrong?" urged Prince Andrew. "It is not given to man to knowwhat is right and what is wrong. Men always did and always will err, andin nothing more than in what they consider right and wrong.""What does harm to another is wrong," said Pierre, feeling with pleasurethat for the first time since his arrival Prince Andrew was roused, hadbegun to talk, and wanted to express what had brought him to his presentstate."And who has told you what is bad for another man?" he asked."Bad! Bad!" exclaimed Pierre. "We all know what is bad for ourselves.""Yes, we know that, but the harm I am conscious of in myself issomething I cannot inflict on others," said Prince Andrew, growing moreand more animated and evidently wishing to express his new outlook toPierre. He spoke in French. "I only know two very real evils in life:remorse and illness. The only good is the absence of those evils. Tolive for myself avoiding those two evils is my whole philosophy now.""And love of one's neighbor, and self-sacrifice?" began Pierre. "No, Ican't agree with you! To live only so as not to do evil and not to haveto repent is not enough. I lived like that, I lived for myself andruined my life. And only now when I am living, or at least trying"(Pierre's modesty made him correct himself) "to live for others, onlynow have I understood all the happiness of life. No, I shall not agreewith you, and you do not really believe what you are saying." PrinceAndrew looked silently at Pierre with an ironic smile."When you see my sister, Princess Mary, you'll get on with her," hesaid. "Perhaps you are right for yourself," he added after a shortpause, "but everyone lives in his own way. You lived for yourself andsay you nearly ruined your life and only found happiness when you beganliving for others. I experienced just the reverse. I lived for glory.--And after all what is glory? The same love of others, a desire to dosomething for them, a desire for their approval.--So I lived for others,and not almost, but quite, ruined my life. And I have become calmersince I began to live only for myself.""But what do you mean by living only for yourself?" asked Pierre,growing excited. "What about your son, your sister, and your father?""But that's just the same as myself--they are not others," explainedPrince Andrew. "The others, one's neighbors, le prochain, as you andPrincess Mary call it, are the chief source of all error and evil. Leprochain--your Kiev peasants to whom you want to do good."And he looked at Pierre with a mocking, challenging expression. Heevidently wished to draw him on."You are joking," replied Pierre, growing more and more excited. "Whaterror or evil can there be in my wishing to do good, and even doing alittle--though I did very little and did it very badly? What evil canthere be in it if unfortunate people, our serfs, people like ourselves,were growing up and dying with no idea of God and truth beyondceremonies and meaningless prayers and are now instructed in acomforting belief in future life, retribution, recompense, andconsolation? What evil and error are there in it, if people were dyingof disease without help while material assistance could so easily berendered, and I supplied them with a doctor, a hospital, and an asylumfor the aged? And is it not a palpable, unquestionable good if apeasant, or a woman with a baby, has no rest day or night and I givethem rest and leisure?" said Pierre, hurrying and lisping. "And I havedone that though badly and to a small extent; but I have done somethingtoward it and you cannot persuade me that it was not a good action, andmore than that, you can't make me believe that you do not think soyourself. And the main thing is," he continued, "that I know, and knowfor certain, that the enjoyment of doing this good is the only surehappiness in life.""Yes, if you put it like that it's quite a different matter," saidPrince Andrew. "I build a house and lay out a garden, and you buildhospitals. The one and the other may serve as a pastime. But what'sright and what's good must be judged by one who knows all, but not byus. Well, you want an argument," he added, "come on then."They rose from the table and sat down in the entrance porch which servedas a veranda."Come, let's argue then," said Prince Andrew, "You talk of schools," hewent on, crooking a finger, "education and so forth; that is, you wantto raise him" (pointing to a peasant who passed by them taking off hiscap) "from his animal condition and awaken in him spiritual needs, whileit seems to me that animal happiness is the only happiness possible, andthat is just what you want to deprive him of. I envy him, but you wantto make him what I am, without giving him my means. Then you say,'lighten his toil.' But as I see it, physical labor is as essential tohim, as much a condition of his existence, as mental activity is to youor me. You can't help thinking. I go to bed after two in the morning,thoughts come and I can't sleep but toss about till dawn, because Ithink and can't help thinking, just as he can't help plowing and mowing;if he didn't, he would go to the drink shop or fall ill. Just as I couldnot stand his terrible physical labor but should die of it in a week, sohe could not stand my physical idleness, but would grow fat and die. Thethird thing--what else was it you talked about?" and Prince Andrewcrooked a third finger. "Ah, yes, hospitals, medicine. He has a fit, heis dying, and you come and bleed him and patch him up. He will dragabout as a cripple, a burden to everybody, for another ten years. Itwould be far easier and simpler for him to die. Others are being bornand there are plenty of them as it is. It would be different if yougrudged losing a laborer--that's how I regard him--but you want to curehim from love of him. And he does not want that. And besides, what anotion that medicine ever cured anyone! Killed them, yes!" said he,frowning angrily and turning away from Pierre.Prince Andrew expressed his ideas so clearly and distinctly that it wasevident he had reflected on this subject more than once, and he spokereadily and rapidly like a man who has not talked for a long time. Hisglance became more animated as his conclusions became more hopeless."Oh, that is dreadful, dreadful!" said Pierre. "I don't understand howone can live with such ideas. I had such moments myself not long ago, inMoscow and when traveling, but at such times I collapsed so that I don'tlive at all--everything seems hateful to me... myself most of all. ThenI don't eat, don't wash... and how is it with you?...""Why not wash? That is not cleanly," said Prince Andrew; "on thecontrary one must try to make one's life as pleasant as possible. I'malive, that is not my fault, so I must live out my life as best I canwithout hurting others.""But with such ideas what motive have you for living? One would sitwithout moving, undertaking nothing....""Life as it is leaves one no peace. I should be thankful to do nothing,but here on the one hand the local nobility have done me the honor tochoose me to be their marshal; it was all I could do to get out of it.They could not understand that I have not the necessary qualificationsfor it--the kind of good-natured, fussy shallowness necessary for theposition. Then there's this house, which must be built in order to havea nook of one's own in which to be quiet. And now there's thisrecruiting.""Why aren't you serving in the army?""After Austerlitz!" said Prince Andrew gloomily. "No, thank you verymuch! I have promised myself not to serve again in the active Russianarmy. And I won't--not even if Bonaparte were here at Smolenskthreatening Bald Hills--even then I wouldn't serve in the Russian army!Well, as I was saying," he continued, recovering his composure, "nowthere's this recruiting. My father is chief in command of the ThirdDistrict, and my only way of avoiding active service is to serve underhim.""Then you are serving?""I am."He paused a little while."And why do you serve?""Why, for this reason! My father is one of the most remarkable men ofhis time. But he is growing old, and though not exactly cruel he has tooenergetic a character. He is so accustomed to unlimited power that he isterrible, and now he has this authority of a commander-in-chief of therecruiting, granted by the Emperor. If I had been two hours late afortnight ago he would have had a paymaster's clerk at Yukhnovnahanged," said Prince Andrew with a smile. "So I am serving because Ialone have any influence with my father, and now and then can save himfrom actions which would torment him afterwards.""Well, there you see!""Yes, but it is not as you imagine," Prince Andrew continued. "I didnot, and do not, in the least care about that scoundrel of a clerk whohad stolen some boots from the recruits; I should even have been veryglad to see him hanged, but I was sorry for my father--that again is formyself."Prince Andrew grew more and more animated. His eyes glittered feverishlywhile he tried to prove to Pierre that in his actions there was nodesire to do good to his neighbor."There now, you wish to liberate your serfs," he continued; "that is avery good thing, but not for you--I don't suppose you ever had anyoneflogged or sent to Siberia--and still less for your serfs. If they arebeaten, flogged, or sent to Siberia, I don't suppose they are any theworse off. In Siberia they lead the same animal life, and the stripes ontheir bodies heal, and they are happy as before. But it is a good thingfor proprietors who perish morally, bring remorse upon themselves,stifle this remorse and grow callous, as a result of being able toinflict punishments justly and unjustly. It is those people I pity, andfor their sake I should like to liberate the serfs. You may not haveseen, but I have seen, how good men brought up in those traditions ofunlimited power, in time when they grow more irritable, become cruel andharsh, are conscious of it, but cannot restrain themselves and grow moreand more miserable."Prince Andrew spoke so earnestly that Pierre could not help thinkingthat these thoughts had been suggested to Prince Andrew by his father'scase.He did not reply."So that's what I'm sorry for--human dignity, peace of mind, purity, andnot the serfs' backs and foreheads, which, beat and shave as you may,always remain the same backs and foreheads.""No, no! A thousand times no! I shall never agree with you," saidPierre.CHAPTER XIIIn the evening Andrew and Pierre got into the open carriage and drove toBald Hills. Prince Andrew, glancing at Pierre, broke the silence now andthen with remarks which showed that he was in a good temper.Pointing to the fields, he spoke of the improvements he was making inhis husbandry.Pierre remained gloomily silent, answering in monosyllables andapparently immersed in his own thoughts.He was thinking that Prince Andrew was unhappy, had gone astray, did notsee the true light, and that he, Pierre, ought to aid, enlighten, andraise him. But as soon as he thought of what he should say, he felt thatPrince Andrew with one word, one argument, would upset all his teaching,and he shrank from beginning, afraid of exposing to possible ridiculewhat to him was precious and sacred."No, but why do you think so?" Pierre suddenly began, lowering his headand looking like a bull about to charge, "why do you think so? Youshould not think so.""Think? What about?" asked Prince Andrew with surprise."About life, about man's destiny. It can't be so. I myself thought likethat, and do you know what saved me? Freemasonry! No, don't smile.Freemasonry is not a religious ceremonial sect, as I thought it was:Freemasonry is the best expression of the best, the eternal, aspects ofhumanity."And he began to explain Freemasonry as he understood it to PrinceAndrew. He said that Freemasonry is the teaching of Christianity freedfrom the bonds of State and Church, a teaching of equality, brotherhood,and love."Only our holy brotherhood has the real meaning of life, all the rest isa dream," said Pierre. "Understand, my dear fellow, that outside thisunion all is filled with deceit and falsehood and I agree with you thatnothing is left for an intelligent and good man but to live out hislife, like you, merely trying not to harm others. But make ourfundamental convictions your own, join our brotherhood, give yourself upto us, let yourself be guided, and you will at once feel yourself, as Ihave felt myself, a part of that vast invisible chain the beginning ofwhich is hidden in heaven," said Pierre.Prince Andrew, looking straight in front of him, listened in silence toPierre's words. More than once, when the noise of the wheels preventedhis catching what Pierre said, he asked him to repeat it, and by thepeculiar glow that came into Prince Andrew's eyes and by his silence,Pierre saw that his words were not in vain and that Prince Andrew wouldnot interrupt him or laugh at what he said.They reached a river that had overflowed its banks and which they had tocross by ferry. While the carriage and horses were being placed on it,they also stepped on the raft.Prince Andrew, leaning his arms on the raft railing, gazed silently atthe flooding waters glittering in the setting sun."Well, what do you think about it?" Pierre asked. "Why are you silent?""What do I think about it? I am listening to you. It's all very well....You say: join our brotherhood and we will show you the aim of life, thedestiny of man, and the laws which govern the world. But who are we?Men. How is it you know everything? Why do I alone not see what you see?You see a reign of goodness and truth on earth, but I don't see it."Pierre interrupted him."Do you believe in a future life?" he asked."A future life?" Prince Andrew repeated, but Pierre, giving him no timeto reply, took the repetition for a denial, the more readily as he knewPrince Andrew's former atheistic convictions."You say you can't see a reign of goodness and truth on earth. Nor couldI, and it cannot be seen if one looks on our life here as the end ofeverything. On earth, here on this earth" (Pierre pointed to thefields), "there is no truth, all is false and evil; but in the universe,in the whole universe there is a kingdom of truth, and we who are nowthe children of earth are--eternally--children of the whole universe.Don't I feel in my soul that I am part of this vast harmonious whole?Don't I feel that I form one link, one step, between the lower andhigher beings, in this vast harmonious multitude of beings in whom theDeity--the Supreme Power if you prefer the term--is manifest? If I see,clearly see, that ladder leading from plant to man, why should I supposeit breaks off at me and does not go farther and farther? I feel that Icannot vanish, since nothing vanishes in this world, but that I shallalways exist and always have existed. I feel that beyond me and above methere are spirits, and that in this world there is truth.""Yes, that is Herder's theory," said Prince Andrew, "but it is not thatwhich can convince me, dear friend--life and death are what convince.What convinces is when one sees a being dear to one, bound up with one'sown life, before whom one was to blame and had hoped to make it right"(Prince Andrew's voice trembled and he turned away), "and suddenly thatbeing is seized with pain, suffers, and ceases to exist.... Why? Itcannot be that there is no answer. And I believe there is.... That'swhat convinces, that is what has convinced me," said Prince Andrew."Yes, yes, of course," said Pierre, "isn't that what I'm saying?""No. All I say is that it is not argument that convinces me of thenecessity of a future life, but this: when you go hand in hand withsomeone and all at once that person vanishes there, into nowhere, andyou yourself are left facing that abyss, and look in. And I have lookedin....""Well, that's it then! You know that there is a there and there is aSomeone? There is the future life. The Someone is--God."Prince Andrew did not reply. The carriage and horses had long since beentaken off, onto the farther bank, and reharnessed. The sun had sunk halfbelow the horizon and an evening frost was starring the puddles near theferry, but Pierre and Andrew, to the astonishment of the footmen,coachmen, and ferrymen, still stood on the raft and talked."If there is a God and future life, there is truth and good, and man'shighest happiness consists in striving to attain them. We must live, wemust love, and we must believe that we live not only today on this scrapof earth, but have lived and shall live forever, there, in the Whole,"said Pierre, and he pointed to the sky.Prince Andrew stood leaning on the railing of the raft listening toPierre, and he gazed with his eyes fixed on the red reflection of thesun gleaming on the blue waters. There was perfect stillness. Pierrebecame silent. The raft had long since stopped and only the waves of thecurrent beat softly against it below. Prince Andrew felt as if the soundof the waves kept up a refrain to Pierre's words, whispering:"It is true, believe it."He sighed, and glanced with a radiant, childlike, tender look atPierre's face, flushed and rapturous, but yet shy before his superiorfriend."Yes, if it only were so!" said Prince Andrew. "However, it is time toget on," he added, and, stepping off the raft, he looked up at the skyto which Pierre had pointed, and for the first time since Austerlitz sawthat high, everlasting sky he had seen while lying on that battlefield;and something that had long been slumbering, something that was bestwithin him, suddenly awoke, joyful and youthful, in his soul. Itvanished as soon as he returned to the customary conditions of his life,but he knew that this feeling which he did not know how to developexisted within him. His meeting with Pierre formed an epoch in PrinceAndrew's life. Though outwardly he continued to live in the same oldway, inwardly he began a new life.CHAPTER XIIIIt was getting dusk when Prince Andrew and Pierre drove up to the frontentrance of the house at Bald Hills. As they approached the house,Prince Andrew with a smile drew Pierre's attention to a commotion goingon at the back porch. A woman, bent with age, with a wallet on her back,and a short, long-haired, young man in a black garment had rushed backto the gate on seeing the carriage driving up. Two women ran out afterthem, and all four, looking round at the carriage, ran in dismay up thesteps of the back porch."Those are Mary's 'God's folk,'" said Prince Andrew. "They have mistakenus for my father. This is the one matter in which she disobeys him. Heorders these pilgrims to be driven away, but she receives them.""But what are 'God's folk'?" asked Pierre.Prince Andrew had no time to answer. The servants came out to meet them,and he asked where the old prince was and whether he was expected backsoon.The old prince had gone to the town and was expected back any minute.Prince Andrew led Pierre to his own apartments, which were always keptin perfect order and readiness for him in his father's house; he himselfwent to the nursery."Let us go and see my sister," he said to Pierre when he returned. "Ihave not found her yet, she is hiding now, sitting with her 'God'sfolk.' It will serve her right, she will be confused, but you will seeher 'God's folk.' It's really very curious.""What are 'God's folk'?" asked Pierre."Come, and you'll see for yourself."Princess Mary really was disconcerted and red patches came on her facewhen they went in. In her snug room, with lamps burning before the iconstand, a young lad with a long nose and long hair, wearing a monk'scassock, sat on the sofa beside her, behind a samovar. Near them, in anarmchair, sat a thin, shriveled, old woman, with a meek expression onher childlike face."Andrew, why didn't you warn me?" said the princess, with mild reproach,as she stood before her pilgrims like a hen before her chickens."Charmee de vous voir. Je suis tres contente de vous voir," * she saidto Pierre as he kissed her hand. She had known him as a child, and nowhis friendship with Andrew, his misfortune with his wife, and above allhis kindly, simple face disposed her favorably toward him. She looked athim with her beautiful radiant eyes and seemed to say, "I like you verymuch, but please don't laugh at my people." After exchanging the firstgreetings, they sat down.* "Delighted to see you. I am very glad to see you.""Ah, and Ivanushka is here too!" said Prince Andrew, glancing with asmile at the young pilgrim."Andrew!" said Princess Mary, imploringly. "Il faut que vous sachiez quec'est une femme," * said Prince Andrew to Pierre."Andrew, au nom de Dieu!" *(2) Princess Mary repeated.* "You must know that this is a woman."* (2) "For heaven's sake."It was evident that Prince Andrew's ironical tone toward the pilgrimsand Princess Mary's helpless attempts to protect them were theircustomary long-established relations on the matter."Mais, ma bonne amie," said Prince Andrew, "vous devriez au contrairem'tre reconnaissante de ce que j'explique a Pierre votre intimit avecce jeune homme." ** "But, my dear, you ought on the contrary to be grateful to me forexplaining to Pierre your intimacy with this young man.""Really?" said Pierre, gazing over his spectacles with curiosity andseriousness (for which Princess Mary was specially grateful to him) intoIvanushka's face, who, seeing that she was being spoken about, lookedround at them all with crafty eyes.Princess Mary's embarrassment on her people's account was quiteunnecessary. They were not in the least abashed. The old woman, loweringher eyes but casting side glances at the newcomers, had turned her cupupside down and placed a nibbled bit of sugar beside it, and sat quietlyin her armchair, though hoping to be offered another cup of tea.Ivanushka, sipping out of her saucer, looked with sly womanish eyes fromunder her brows at the young men."Where have you been? To Kiev?" Prince Andrew asked the old woman."I have, good sir," she answered garrulously. "Just at Christmastime Iwas deemed worthy to partake of the holy and heavenly sacrament at theshrine of the saint. And now I'm from Kolyazin, master, where a greatand wonderful blessing has been revealed.""And was Ivanushka with you?""I go by myself, benefactor," said Ivanushka, trying to speak in a bassvoice. "I only came across Pelageya in Yukhnovo..."Pelageya interrupted her companion; she evidently wished to tell whatshe had seen."In Kolyazin, master, a wonderful blessing has been revealed.""What is it? Some new relics?" asked Prince Andrew."Andrew, do leave off," said Princess Mary. "Don't tell him, Pelageya.""No... why not, my dear, why shouldn't I? I like him. He is kind, he isone of God's chosen, he's a benefactor, he once gave me ten rubles, Iremember. When I was in Kiev, Crazy Cyril says to me (he's one of God'sown and goes barefoot summer and winter), he says, 'Why are you notgoing to the right place? Go to Kolyazin where a wonder-working icon ofthe Holy Mother of God has been revealed.' On hearing those words I saidgood-by to the holy folk and went."All were silent, only the pilgrim woman went on in measured tones,drawing in her breath."So I come, master, and the people say to me: 'A great blessing has beenrevealed, holy oil trickles from the cheeks of our blessed Mother, theHoly Virgin Mother of God'....""All right, all right, you can tell us afterwards," said Princess Mary,flushing."Let me ask her," said Pierre. "Did you see it yourselves?" he inquired."Oh, yes, master, I was found worthy. Such a brightness on the face likethe light of heaven, and from the blessed Mother's cheek it drops anddrops....""But, dear me, that must be a fraud!" said Pierre, naively, who hadlistened attentively to the pilgrim."Oh, master, what are you saying?" exclaimed the horrified Pelageya,turning to Princess Mary for support."They impose on the people," he repeated."Lord Jesus Christ!" exclaimed the pilgrim woman, crossing herself. "Oh,don't speak so, master! There was a general who did not believe, andsaid, 'The monks cheat,' and as soon as he'd said it he went blind. Andhe dreamed that the Holy Virgin Mother of the Kiev catacombs came to himand said, 'Believe in me and I will make you whole.' So he begged: 'Takeme to her, take me to her.' It's the real truth I'm telling you, I sawit myself. So he was brought, quite blind, straight to her, and he goesup to her and falls down and says, 'Make me whole,' says he, 'and I'llgive thee what the Tsar bestowed on me.' I saw it myself, master, thestar is fixed into the icon. Well, and what do you think? He receivedhis sight! It's a sin to speak so. God will punish you," she saidadmonishingly, turning to Pierre."How did the star get into the icon?" Pierre asked."And was the Holy Mother promoted to the rank of general?" said PrinceAndrew, with a smile.Pelageya suddenly grew quite pale and clasped her hands."Oh, master, master, what a sin! And you who have a son!" she began, herpallor suddenly turning to a vivid red. "Master, what have you said? Godforgive you!" And she crossed herself. "Lord forgive him! My dear, whatdoes it mean?..." she asked, turning to Princess Mary. She got up and,almost crying, began to arrange her wallet. She evidently feltfrightened and ashamed to have accepted charity in a house where suchthings could be said, and was at the same time sorry to have now toforgo the charity of this house."Now, why need you do it?" said Princess Mary. "Why did you come tome?...""Come, Pelageya, I was joking," said Pierre. "Princesse, ma parole, jen'ai pas voulu l'offenser. * I did not mean anything, I was onlyjoking," he said, smiling shyly and trying to efface his offense. "Itwas all my fault, and Andrew was only joking."* "Princess, on my word, I did not wish to offend her."Pelageya stopped doubtfully, but in Pierre's face there was such a lookof sincere penitence, and Prince Andrew glanced so meekly now at her andnow at Pierre, that she was gradually reassured.CHAPTER XIVThe pilgrim woman was appeased and, being encouraged to talk, gave along account of Father Amphilochus, who led so holy a life that hishands smelled of incense, and how on her last visit to Kiev some monksshe knew let her have the keys of the catacombs, and how she, takingsome dried bread with her, had spent two days in the catacombs with thesaints. "I'd pray awhile to one, ponder awhile, then go on to another.I'd sleep a bit and then again go and kiss the relics, and there wassuch peace all around, such blessedness, that one don't want to comeout, even into the light of heaven again."Pierre listened to her attentively and seriously. Prince Andrew went outof the room, and then, leaving "God's folk" to finish their tea,Princess Mary took Pierre into the drawing room."You are very kind," she said to him."Oh, I really did not mean to hurt her feelings. I understand them sowell and have the greatest respect for them."Princess Mary looked at him silently and smiled affectionately."I have known you a long time, you see, and am as fond of you as of abrother," she said. "How do you find Andrew?" she added hurriedly, notgiving him time to reply to her affectionate words. "I am very anxiousabout him. His health was better in the winter, but last spring hiswound reopened and the doctor said he ought to go away for a cure. And Iam also very much afraid for him spiritually. He has not a characterlike us women who, when we suffer, can weep away our sorrows. He keepsit all within him. Today he is cheerful and in good spirits, but that isthe effect of your visit--he is not often like that. If you couldpersuade him to go abroad. He needs activity, and this quiet regularlife is very bad for him. Others don't notice it, but I see it."Toward ten o'clock the men servants rushed to the front door, hearingthe bells of the old prince's carriage approaching. Prince Andrew andPierre also went out into the porch."Who's that?" asked the old prince, noticing Pierre as he got out of thecarriage."Ah! Very glad! Kiss me," he said, having learned who the young strangerwas.The old prince was in a good temper and very gracious to Pierre.Before supper, Prince Andrew, coming back to his father's study, foundhim disputing hotly with his visitor. Pierre was maintaining that a timewould come when there would be no more wars. The old prince disputed itchaffingly, but without getting angry."Drain the blood from men's veins and put in water instead, then therewill be no more war! Old women's nonsense--old women's nonsense!" herepeated, but still he patted Pierre affectionately on the shoulder, andthen went up to the table where Prince Andrew, evidently not wishing tojoin in the conversation, was looking over the papers his father hadbrought from town. The old prince went up to him and began to talkbusiness."The marshal, a Count Rostov, hasn't sent half his contingent. He cameto town and wanted to invite me to dinner--I gave him a prettydinner!... And there, look at this.... Well, my boy," the old princewent on, addressing his son and patting Pierre on the shoulder. "A finefellow--your friend--I like him! He stirs me up. Another says cleverthings and one doesn't care to listen, but this one talks rubbish yetstirs an old fellow up. Well, go! Get along! Perhaps I'll come and sitwith you at supper. We'll have another dispute. Make friends with mylittle fool, Princess Mary," he shouted after Pierre, through the door.Only now, on his visit to Bald Hills, did Pierre fully realize thestrength and charm of his friendship with Prince Andrew. That charm wasnot expressed so much in his relations with him as with all his familyand with the household. With the stern old prince and the gentle, timidPrincess Mary, though he had scarcely known them, Pierre at once feltlike an old friend. They were all fond of him already. Not only PrincessMary, who had been won by his gentleness with the pilgrims, gave him hermost radiant looks, but even the one-year-old "Prince Nicholas" (as hisgrandfather called him) smiled at Pierre and let himself be taken in hisarms, and Michael Ivanovich and Mademoiselle Bourienne looked at himwith pleasant smiles when he talked to the old prince.The old prince came in to supper; this was evidently on Pierre'saccount. And during the two days of the young man's visit he wasextremely kind to him and told him to visit them again.When Pierre had gone and the members of the household met together, theybegan to express their opinions of him as people always do after a newacquaintance has left, but as seldom happens, no one said anything butwhat was good of him.CHAPTER XVWhen returning from his leave, Rostov felt, for the first time, howclose was the bond that united him to Denisov and the whole regiment.On approaching it, Rostov felt as he had done when approaching his homein Moscow. When he saw the first hussar with the unbuttoned uniform ofhis regiment, when he recognized red-haired Dementyev and saw the picketropes of the roan horses, when Lavrushka gleefully shouted to hismaster, "The count has come!" and Denisov, who had been asleep on hisbed, ran all disheveled out of the mud hut to embrace him, and theofficers collected round to greet the new arrival, Rostov experiencedthe same feeling as when his mother, his father, and his sister hadembraced him, and tears of joy choked him so that he could not speak.The regiment was also a home, and as unalterably dear and precious ashis parents' house.When he had reported himself to the commander of the regiment and hadbeen reassigned to his former squadron, had been on duty and had goneout foraging, when he had again entered into all the little interests ofthe regiment and felt himself deprived of liberty and bound in onenarrow, unchanging frame, he experienced the same sense of peace, ofmoral support, and the same sense of being at home here in his ownplace, as he had felt under the parental roof. But here was none of allthat turmoil of the world at large, where he did not know his rightplace and took mistaken decisions; here was no Sonya with whom he ought,or ought not, to have an explanation; here was no possibility of goingthere or not going there; here there were not twenty-four hours in theday which could be spent in such a variety of ways; there was not thatinnumerable crowd of people of whom not one was nearer to him or fartherfrom him than another; there were none of those uncertain and undefinedmoney relations with his father, and nothing to recall that terribleloss to Dolokhov. Here, in the regiment, all was clear and simple. Thewhole world was divided into two unequal parts: one, our Pavlogradregiment; the other, all the rest. And the rest was no concern of his.In the regiment, everything was definite: who was lieutenant, whocaptain, who was a good fellow, who a bad one, and most of all, who wasa comrade. The canteenkeeper gave one credit, one's pay came every fourmonths, there was nothing to think out or decide, you had only to donothing that was considered bad in the Pavlograd regiment and, whengiven an order, to do what was clearly, distinctly, and definitelyordered--and all would be well.Having once more entered into the definite conditions of this regimentallife, Rostov felt the joy and relief a tired man feels on lying down torest. Life in the regiment, during this campaign, was all the pleasanterfor him, because, after his loss to Dolokhov (for which, in spite of allhis family's efforts to console him, he could not forgive himself), hehad made up his mind to atone for his fault by serving, not as he haddone before, but really well, and by being a perfectly first-ratecomrade and officer--in a word, a splendid man altogether, a thing whichseemed so difficult out in the world, but so possible in the regiment.After his losses, he had determined to pay back his debt to his parentsin five years. He received ten thousand rubles a year, but now resolvedto take only two thousand and leave the rest to repay the debt to hisparents.Our army, after repeated retreats and advances and battles at Pultuskand Preussisch-Eylau, was concentrated near Bartenstein. It was awaitingthe Emperor's arrival and the beginning of a new campaign.The Pavlograd regiment, belonging to that part of the army which hadserved in the 1805 campaign, had been recruiting up to strength inRussia, and arrived too late to take part in the first actions of thecampaign. It had been neither at Pultusk nor at Preussisch-Eylau and,when it joined the army in the field in the second half of the campaign,was attached to Platov's division.Platov's division was acting independently of the main army. Severaltimes parts of the Pavlograd regiment had exchanged shots with theenemy, had taken prisoners, and once had even captured Marshal Oudinot'scarriages. In April the Pavlograds were stationed immovably for someweeks near a totally ruined and deserted German village.A thaw had set in, it was muddy and cold, the ice on the river broke,and the roads became impassable. For days neither provisions for the mennor fodder for the horses had been issued. As no transports couldarrive, the men dispersed about the abandoned and deserted villages,searching for potatoes, but found few even of these.Everything had been eaten up and the inhabitants had all fled--if anyremained, they were worse than beggars and nothing more could be takenfrom them; even the soldiers, usually pitiless enough, instead of takinganything from them, often gave them the last of their rations.The Pavlograd regiment had had only two men wounded in action, but hadlost nearly half its men from hunger and sickness. In the hospitals,death was so certain that soldiers suffering from fever, or the swellingthat came from bad food, preferred to remain on duty, and hardly able todrag their legs went to the front rather than to the hospitals. Whenspring came on, the soldiers found a plant just showing out of theground that looked like asparagus, which, for some reason, they called"Mashka's sweet root." It was very bitter, but they wandered about thefields seeking it and dug it out with their sabers and ate it, thoughthey were ordered not to do so, as it was a noxious plant. That spring anew disease broke out among the soldiers, a swelling of the arms, legs,and face, which the doctors attributed to eating this root. But in spiteof all this, the soldiers of Denisov's squadron fed chiefly on "Mashka'ssweet root," because it was the second week that the last of thebiscuits were being doled out at the rate of half a pound a man and thelast potatoes received had sprouted and frozen.The horses also had been fed for a fortnight on straw from the thatchedroofs and had become terribly thin, though still covered with tufts offelty winter hair.Despite this destitution, the soldiers and officers went on living justas usual. Despite their pale swollen faces and tattered uniforms, thehussars formed line for roll call, kept things in order, groomed theirhorses, polished their arms, brought in straw from the thatched roofs inplace of fodder, and sat down to dine round the caldrons from which theyrose up hungry, joking about their nasty food and their hunger. Asusual, in their spare time, they lit bonfires, steamed themselves beforethem naked; smoked, picked out and baked sprouting rotten potatoes, toldand listened to stories of Potemkin's and Suvorov's campaigns, or tolegends of Alesha the Sly, or the priest's laborer Mikolka.The officers, as usual, lived in twos and threes in the roofless, half-ruined houses. The seniors tried to collect straw and potatoes and, ingeneral, food for the men. The younger ones occupied themselves asbefore, some playing cards (there was plenty of money, though there wasno food), some with more innocent games, such as quoits and skittles.The general trend of the campaign was rarely spoken of, partly becausenothing certain was known about it, partly because there was a vaguefeeling that in the main it was going badly.Rostov lived, as before, with Denisov, and since their furlough they hadbecome more friendly than ever. Denisov never spoke of Rostov's family,but by the tender friendship his commander showed him, Rostov felt thatthe elder hussar's luckless love for Natasha played a part instrengthening their friendship. Denisov evidently tried to expose Rostovto danger as seldom as possible, and after an action greeted his safereturn with evident joy. On one of his foraging expeditions, in adeserted and ruined village to which he had come in search ofprovisions, Rostov found a family consisting of an old Pole and hisdaughter with an infant in arms. They were half clad, hungry, too weakto get away on foot and had no means of obtaining a conveyance. Rostovbrought them to his quarters, placed them in his own lodging, and keptthem for some weeks while the old man was recovering. One of hiscomrades, talking of women, began chaffing Rostov, saying that he wasmore wily than any of them and that it would not be a bad thing if heintroduced to them the pretty Polish girl he had saved. Rostov took thejoke as an insult, flared up, and said such unpleasant things to theofficer that it was all Denisov could do to prevent a duel. When theofficer had gone away, Denisov, who did not himself know what Rostov'srelations with the Polish girl might be, began to upbraid him for hisquickness of temper, and Rostov replied:"Say what you like.... She is like a sister to me, and I can't tell youhow it offended me... because... well, for that reason...."Denisov patted him on the shoulder and began rapidly pacing the roomwithout looking at Rostov, as was his way at moments of deep feeling."Ah, what a mad bweed you Wostovs are!" he muttered, and Rostov noticedtears in his eyes.CHAPTER XVIIn April the troops were enlivened by news of the Emperor's arrival, butRostov had no chance of being present at the review he held atBartenstein, as the Pavlograds were at the outposts far beyond thatplace.They were bivouacking. Denisov and Rostov were living in an earth hut,dug out for them by the soldiers and roofed with branches and turf. Thehut was made in the following manner, which had then come into vogue. Atrench was dug three and a half feet wide, four feet eight inches deep,and eight feet long. At one end of the trench, steps were cut out andthese formed the entrance and vestibule. The trench itself was the room,in which the lucky ones, such as the squadron commander, had a board,lying on piles at the end opposite the entrance, to serve as a table. Oneach side of the trench, the earth was cut out to a breadth of about twoand a half feet, and this did duty for bedsteads and couches. The roofwas so constructed that one could stand up in the middle of the trenchand could even sit up on the beds if one drew close to the table.Denisov, who was living luxuriously because the soldiers of his squadronliked him, had also a board in the roof at the farther end, with a pieceof (broken but mended) glass in it for a window. When it was very cold,embers from the soldiers' campfire were placed on a bent sheet of ironon the steps in the "reception room"--as Denisov called that part of thehut--and it was then so warm that the officers, of whom there werealways some with Denisov and Rostov, sat in their shirt sleeves.In April, Rostov was on orderly duty. One morning, between seven andeight, returning after a sleepless night, he sent for embers, changedhis rain-soaked underclothes, said his prayers, drank tea, got warm,then tidied up the things on the table and in his own corner, and, hisface glowing from exposure to the wind and with nothing on but hisshirt, lay down on his back, putting his arms under his head. He waspleasantly considering the probability of being promoted in a few daysfor his last reconnoitering expedition, and was awaiting Denisov, whohad gone out somewhere and with whom he wanted a talk.Suddenly he heard Denisov shouting in a vibrating voice behind the hut,evidently much excited. Rostov moved to the window to see whom he wasspeaking to, and saw the quartermaster, Topcheenko."I ordered you not to let them eat that Mashka woot stuff!" Denisov wasshouting. "And I saw with my own eyes how Lazarchuk bwought some fwomthe fields.""I have given the order again and again, your honor, but they don'tobey," answered the quartermaster.Rostov lay down again on his bed and thought complacently: "Let him fussand bustle now, my job's done and I'm lying down--capitally!" He couldhear that Lavrushka--that sly, bold orderly of Denisov's--was talking,as well as the quartermaster. Lavrushka was saying something aboutloaded wagons, biscuits, and oxen he had seen when he had gone out forprovisions.Then Denisov's voice was heard shouting farther and farther away."Saddle! Second platoon!""Where are they off to now?" thought Rostov.Five minutes later, Denisov came into the hut, climbed with muddy bootson the bed, lit his pipe, furiously scattered his things about, took hisleaded whip, buckled on his saber, and went out again. In answer toRostov's inquiry where he was going, he answered vaguely and crosslythat he had some business."Let God and our gweat monarch judge me afterwards!" said Denisov goingout, and Rostov heard the hoofs of several horses splashing through themud. He did not even trouble to find out where Denisov had gone. Havinggot warm in his corner, he fell asleep and did not leave the hut tilltoward evening. Denisov had not yet returned. The weather had clearedup, and near the next hut two officers and a cadet were playing svayka,laughing as they threw their missiles which buried themselves in thesoft mud. Rostov joined them. In the middle of the game, the officerssaw some wagons approaching with fifteen hussars on their skinny horsesbehind them. The wagons escorted by the hussars drew up to the picketropes and a crowd of hussars surrounded them."There now, Denisov has been worrying," said Rostov, "and here are theprovisions.""So they are!" said the officers. "Won't the soldiers be glad!"A little behind the hussars came Denisov, accompanied by two infantryofficers with whom he was talking.Rostov went to meet them."I warn you, Captain," one of the officers, a short thin man, evidentlyvery angry, was saying."Haven't I told you I won't give them up?" replied Denisov."You will answer for it, Captain. It is mutiny--seizing the transport ofone's own army. Our men have had nothing to eat for two days.""And mine have had nothing for two weeks," said Denisov."It is robbery! You'll answer for it, sir!" said the infantry officer,raising his voice."Now, what are you pestewing me for?" cried Denisov, suddenly losing histemper. "I shall answer for it and not you, and you'd better not buzzabout here till you get hurt. Be off! Go!" he shouted at the officers."Very well, then!" shouted the little officer, undaunted and not ridingaway. "If you are determined to rob, I'll...""Go to the devil! quick ma'ch, while you're safe and sound!" and Denisovturned his horse on the officer."Very well, very well!" muttered the officer, threateningly, and turninghis horse he trotted away, jolting in his saddle."A dog astwide a fence! A weal dog astwide a fence!" shouted Denisovafter him (the most insulting expression a cavalryman can address to amounted infantryman) and riding up to Rostov, he burst out laughing."I've taken twansports from the infantwy by force!" he said. "After all,can't let our men starve."The wagons that had reached the hussars had been consigned to aninfantry regiment, but learning from Lavrushka that the transport wasunescorted, Denisov with his hussars had seized it by force. Thesoldiers had biscuits dealt out to them freely, and they even sharedthem with the other squadrons.The next day the regimental commander sent for Denisov, and holding hisfingers spread out before his eyes said:"This is how I look at this affair: I know nothing about it and won'tbegin proceedings, but I advise you to ride over to the staff and settlethe business there in the commissariat department and if possible sign areceipt for such and such stores received. If not, as the demand wasbooked against an infantry regiment, there will be a row and the affairmay end badly."From the regimental commander's, Denisov rode straight to the staff witha sincere desire to act on this advice. In the evening he came back tohis dugout in a state such as Rostov had never yet seen him in. Denisovcould not speak and gasped for breath. When Rostov asked what was thematter, he only uttered some incoherent oaths and threats in a hoarse,feeble voice.Alarmed at Denisov's condition, Rostov suggested that he should undress,drink some water, and send for the doctor."Twy me for wobbewy... oh! Some more water... Let them twy me, but I'llalways thwash scoundwels... and I'll tell the Empewo'... Ice..." hemuttered.The regimental doctor, when he came, said it was absolutely necessary tobleed Denisov. A deep saucer of black blood was taken from his hairy armand only then was he able to relate what had happened to him."I get there," began Denisov. "'Now then, where's your chief'squarters?' They were pointed out. 'Please to wait.' 'I've widden twentymiles and have duties to attend to and no time to wait. Announce me.'Vewy well, so out comes their head chief--also took it into his head tolecture me: 'It's wobbewy!'--'Wobbewy,' I say, 'is not done by man whoseizes pwovisions to feed his soldiers, but by him who takes them tofill his own pockets!' 'Will you please be silent?' 'Vewy good!' Then hesays: 'Go and give a weceipt to the commissioner, but your affair willbe passed on to headquarters.' I go to the commissioner. I enter, and atthe table... who do you think? No, but wait a bit!... Who is it that'sstarving us?" shouted Denisov, hitting the table with the fist of hisnewly bled arm so violently that the table nearly broke down and thetumblers on it jumped about. "Telyanin! 'What? So it's you who'sstarving us to death! Is it? Take this and this!' and I hit him so pat,stwaight on his snout... 'Ah, what a... what a...!' and I sta'tedfwashing him... Well, I've had a bit of fun I can tell you!" criedDenisov, gleeful and yet angry, his white teeth showing under his blackmustache. "I'd have killed him if they hadn't taken him away!""But what are you shouting for? Calm yourself," said Rostov. "You've setyour arm bleeding afresh. Wait, we must tie it up again."Denisov was bandaged up again and put to bed. Next day he woke calm andcheerful.But at noon the adjutant of the regiment came into Rostov's andDenisov's dugout with a grave and serious face and regretfully showedthem a paper addressed to Major Denisov from the regimental commander inwhich inquiries were made about yesterday's occurrence. The adjutanttold them that the affair was likely to take a very bad turn: that acourt-martial had been appointed, and that in view of the severity withwhich marauding and insubordination were now regarded, degradation tothe ranks would be the best that could be hoped for.The case, as represented by the offended parties, was that, afterseizing the transports, Major Denisov, being drunk, went to the chiefquartermaster and without any provocation called him a thief, threatenedto strike him, and on being led out had rushed into the office and giventwo officials a thrashing, and dislocated the arm of one of them.In answer to Rostov's renewed questions, Denisov said, laughing, that hethought he remembered that some other fellow had got mixed up in it, butthat it was all nonsense and rubbish, and he did not in the least fearany kind of trial, and that if those scoundrels dared attack him hewould give them an answer that they would not easily forget.Denisov spoke contemptuously of the whole matter, but Rostov knew himtoo well not to detect that (while hiding it from others) at heart hefeared a court-martial and was worried over the affair, which wasevidently taking a bad turn. Every day, letters of inquiry and noticesfrom the court arrived, and on the first of May, Denisov was ordered tohand the squadron over to the next in seniority and appear before thestaff of his division to explain his violence at the commissariatoffice. On the previous day Platov reconnoitered with two Cossackregiments and two squadrons of hussars. Denisov, as was his wont, rodeout in front of the outposts, parading his courage. A bullet fired by aFrench sharpshooter hit him in the fleshy part of his leg. Perhaps atanother time Denisov would not have left the regiment for so slight awound, but now he took advantage of it to excuse himself from appearingat the staff and went into hospital.CHAPTER XVIIIn June the battle of Friedland was fought, in which the Pavlograds didnot take part, and after that an armistice was proclaimed. Rostov, whofelt his friend's absence very much, having no news of him since he leftand feeling very anxious about his wound and the progress of hisaffairs, took advantage of the armistice to get leave to visit Denisovin hospital.The hospital was in a small Prussian town that had been twice devastatedby Russian and French troops. Because it was summer, when it is sobeautiful out in the fields, the little town presented a particularlydismal appearance with its broken roofs and fences, its foul streets,tattered inhabitants, and the sick and drunken soldiers wandering about.The hospital was in a brick building with some of the window frames andpanes broken and a courtyard surrounded by the remains of a wooden fencethat had been pulled to pieces. Several bandaged soldiers, with paleswollen faces, were sitting or walking about in the sunshine in theyard.Directly Rostov entered the door he was enveloped by a smell ofputrefaction and hospital air. On the stairs he met a Russian armydoctor smoking a cigar. The doctor was followed by a Russian assistant."I can't tear myself to pieces," the doctor was saying. "Come to MakarAlexeevich in the evening. I shall be there."The assistant asked some further questions."Oh, do the best you can! Isn't it all the same?" The doctor noticedRostov coming upstairs."What do you want, sir?" said the doctor. "What do you want? The bulletshaving spared you, do you want to try typhus? This is a pesthouse, sir.""How so?" asked Rostov."Typhus, sir. It's death to go in. Only we two, Makeev and I" (hepointed to the assistant), "keep on here. Some five of us doctors havedied in this place.... When a new one comes he is done for in a week,"said the doctor with evident satisfaction. "Prussian doctors have beeninvited here, but our allies don't like it at all."Rostov explained that he wanted to see Major Denisov of the hussars, whowas wounded."I don't know. I can't tell you, sir. Only think! I am alone in chargeof three hospitals with more than four hundred patients! It's well thatthe charitable Prussian ladies send us two pounds of coffee and somelint each month or we should be lost!" he laughed. "Four hundred, sir,and they're always sending me fresh ones. There are four hundred? Eh?"he asked, turning to the assistant.The assistant looked fagged out. He was evidently vexed and impatientfor the talkative doctor to go."Major Denisov," Rostov said again. "He was wounded at Molliten.""Dead, I fancy. Eh, Makeev?" queried the doctor, in a tone ofindifference.The assistant, however, did not confirm the doctor's words."Is he tall and with reddish hair?" asked the doctor.Rostov described Denisov's appearance."There was one like that," said the doctor, as if pleased. "That one isdead, I fancy. However, I'll look up our list. We had a list. Have yougot it, Makeev?""Makar Alexeevich has the list," answered the assistant. "But if you'llstep into the officers' wards you'll see for yourself," he added,turning to Rostov."Ah, you'd better not go, sir," said the doctor, "or you may have tostay here yourself."But Rostov bowed himself away from the doctor and asked the assistant toshow him the way."Only don't blame me!" the doctor shouted up after him.Rostov and the assistant went into the dark corridor. The smell was sostrong there that Rostov held his nose and had to pause and collect hisstrength before he could go on. A door opened to the right, and anemaciated sallow man on crutches, barefoot and in underclothing, limpedout and, leaning against the doorpost, looked with glittering enviouseyes at those who were passing. Glancing in at the door, Rostov saw thatthe sick and wounded were lying on the floor on straw and overcoats."May I go in and look?""What is there to see?" said the assistant.But, just because the assistant evidently did not want him to go in,Rostov entered the soldiers' ward. The foul air, to which he had alreadybegun to get used in the corridor, was still stronger here. It was alittle different, more pungent, and one felt that this was where itoriginated.In the long room, brightly lit up by the sun through the large windows,the sick and wounded lay in two rows with their heads to the walls, andleaving a passage in the middle. Most of them were unconscious and paidno attention to the newcomers. Those who were conscious raisedthemselves or lifted their thin yellow faces, and all looked intently atRostov with the same expression of hope, of relief, reproach, and envyof another's health. Rostov went to the middle of the room and lookingthrough the open doors into the two adjoining rooms saw the same thingthere. He stood still, looking silently around. He had not at allexpected such a sight. Just before him, almost across the middle of thepassage on the bare floor, lay a sick man, probably a Cossack to judgeby the cut of his hair. The man lay on his back, his huge arms and legsoutstretched. His face was purple, his eyes were rolled back so thatonly the whites were seen, and on his bare legs and arms which werestill red, the veins stood out like cords. He was knocking the back ofhis head against the floor, hoarsely uttering some word which he keptrepeating. Rostov listened and made out the word. It was "drink, drink,a drink!" Rostov glanced round, looking for someone who would put thisman back in his place and bring him water."Who looks after the sick here?" he asked the assistant.Just then a commissariat soldier, a hospital orderly, came in from thenext room, marching stiffly, and drew up in front of Rostov."Good day, your honor!" he shouted, rolling his eyes at Rostov andevidently mistaking him for one of the hospital authorities."Get him to his place and give him some water," said Rostov, pointing tothe Cossack."Yes, your honor," the soldier replied complacently, and rolling hiseyes more than ever he drew himself up still straighter, but did notmove."No, it's impossible to do anything here," thought Rostov, lowering hiseyes, and he was going out, but became aware of an intense look fixed onhim on his right, and he turned. Close to the corner, on an overcoat,sat an old, unshaven, gray-bearded soldier as thin as a skeleton, with astern sallow face and eyes intently fixed on Rostov. The man's neighboron one side whispered something to him, pointing at Rostov, who noticedthat the old man wanted to speak to him. He drew nearer and saw that theold man had only one leg bent under him, the other had been amputatedabove the knee. His neighbor on the other side, who lay motionless somedistance from him with his head thrown back, was a young soldier with asnub nose. His pale waxen face was still freckled and his eyes wererolled back. Rostov looked at the young soldier and a cold chill randown his back."Why, this one seems..." he began, turning to the assistant."And how we've been begging, your honor," said the old soldier, his jawquivering. "He's been dead since morning. After all we're men, notdogs.""I'll send someone at once. He shall be taken away--taken away at once,"said the assistant hurriedly. "Let us go, your honor.""Yes, yes, let us go," said Rostov hastily, and lowering his eyes andshrinking, he tried to pass unnoticed between the rows of reproachfulenvious eyes that were fixed upon him, and went out of the room.CHAPTER XVIIIGoing along the corridor, the assistant led Rostov to the officers'wards, consisting of three rooms, the doors of which stood open. Therewere beds in these rooms and the sick and wounded officers were lying orsitting on them. Some were walking about the rooms in hospital dressinggowns. The first person Rostov met in the officers' ward was a thinlittle man with one arm, who was walking about the first room in anightcap and hospital dressing gown, with a pipe between his teeth.Rostov looked at him, trying to remember where he had seen him before."See where we've met again!" said the little man. "Tushin, Tushin, don'tyou remember, who gave you a lift at Schon Grabern? And I've had a bitcut off, you see..." he went on with a smile, pointing to the emptysleeve of his dressing gown. "Looking for Vasili Dmitrich Denisov? Myneighbor," he added, when he heard who Rostov wanted. "Here, here," andTushin led him into the next room, from whence came sounds of severallaughing voices."How can they laugh, or even live at all here?" thought Rostov, stillaware of that smell of decomposing flesh that had been so strong in thesoldiers' ward, and still seeming to see fixed on him those enviouslooks which had followed him out from both sides, and the face of thatyoung soldier with eyes rolled back.Denisov lay asleep on his bed with his head under the blanket, though itwas nearly noon."Ah, Wostov? How are you, how are you?" he called out, still in the samevoice as in the regiment, but Rostov noticed sadly that under thishabitual ease and animation some new, sinister, hidden feeling showeditself in the expression of Denisov's face and the intonations of hisvoice.His wound, though a slight one, had not yet healed even now, six weeksafter he had been hit. His face had the same swollen pallor as the facesof the other hospital patients, but it was not this that struck Rostov.What struck him was that Denisov did not seem glad to see him, andsmiled at him unnaturally. He did not ask about the regiment, nor aboutthe general state of affairs, and when Rostov spoke of these matters didnot listen.Rostov even noticed that Denisov did not like to be reminded of theregiment, or in general of that other free life which was going onoutside the hospital. He seemed to try to forget that old life and wasonly interested in the affair with the commissariat officers. OnRostov's inquiry as to how the matter stood, he at once produced fromunder his pillow a paper he had received from the commission and therough draft of his answer to it. He became animated when he beganreading his paper and specially drew Rostov's attention to the stingingrejoinders he made to his enemies. His hospital companions, who hadgathered round Rostov--a fresh arrival from the world outside--graduallybegan to disperse as soon as Denisov began reading his answer. Rostovnoticed by their faces that all those gentlemen had already heard thatstory more than once and were tired of it. Only the man who had the nextbed, a stout Uhlan, continued to sit on his bed, gloomily frowning andsmoking a pipe, and little one-armed Tushin still listened, shaking hishead disapprovingly. In the middle of the reading, the Uhlan interruptedDenisov."But what I say is," he said, turning to Rostov, "it would be bestsimply to petition the Emperor for pardon. They say great rewards willnow be distributed, and surely a pardon would be granted....""Me petition the Empewo'!" exclaimed Denisov, in a voice to which hetried hard to give the old energy and fire, but which sounded like anexpression of irritable impotence. "What for? If I were a wobber I wouldask mercy, but I'm being court-martialed for bwinging wobbers to book.Let them twy me, I'm not afwaid of anyone. I've served the Tsar and mycountwy honowably and have not stolen! And am I to be degwaded?...Listen, I'm w'iting to them stwaight. This is what I say: 'If I hadwobbed the Tweasuwy...'""It's certainly well written," said Tushin, "but that's not the point,Vasili Dmitrich," and he also turned to Rostov. "One has to submit, andVasili Dmitrich doesn't want to. You know the auditor told you it was abad business.""Well, let it be bad," said Denisov."The auditor wrote out a petition for you," continued Tushin, "and youought to sign it and ask this gentleman to take it. No doubt he"(indicating Rostov) "has connections on the staff. You won't find abetter opportunity.""Haven't I said I'm not going to gwovel?" Denisov interrupted him, wenton reading his paper.Rostov had not the courage to persuade Denisov, though he instinctivelyfelt that the way advised by Tushin and the other officers was thesafest, and though he would have been glad to be of service to Denisov.He knew his stubborn will and straightforward hasty temper.When the reading of Denisov's virulent reply, which took more than anhour, was over, Rostov said nothing, and he spent the rest of the day ina most dejected state of mind amid Denisov's hospital comrades, who hadgathered round him, telling them what he knew and listening to theirstories. Denisov was moodily silent all the evening.Late in the evening, when Rostov was about to leave, he asked Denisovwhether he had no commission for him."Yes, wait a bit," said Denisov, glancing round at the officers, andtaking his papers from under his pillow he went to the window, where hehad an inkpot, and sat down to write."It seems it's no use knocking one's head against a wall!" he said,coming from the window and giving Rostov a large envelope. In it was thepetition to the Emperor drawn up by the auditor, in which Denisov,without alluding to the offenses of the commissariat officials, simplyasked for pardon."Hand it in. It seems..."He did not finish, but gave a painfully unnatural smile.CHAPTER XIXHaving returned to the regiment and told the commander the state ofDenisov's affairs, Rostov rode to Tilsit with the letter to the Emperor.On the thirteenth of June the French and Russian Emperors arrived inTilsit. Boris Drubetskoy had asked the important personage on whom hewas in attendance, to include him in the suite appointed for the stay atTilsit."I should like to see the great man," he said, alluding to Napoleon,whom hitherto he, like everyone else, had always called Buonaparte."You are speaking of Buonaparte?" asked the general, smiling.Boris looked at his general inquiringly and immediately saw that he wasbeing tested."I am speaking, Prince, of the Emperor Napoleon," he replied. Thegeneral patted him on the shoulder, with a smile."You will go far," he said, and took him to Tilsit with him.Boris was among the few present at the Niemen on the day the twoEmperors met. He saw the raft, decorated with monograms, saw Napoleonpass before the French Guards on the farther bank of the river, saw thepensive face of the Emperor Alexander as he sat in silence in a tavernon the bank of the Niemen awaiting Napoleon's arrival, saw both Emperorsget into boats, and saw how Napoleon--reaching the raft first--steppedquickly forward to meet Alexander and held out his hand to him, and howthey both retired into the pavilion. Since he had begun to move in thehighest circles Boris had made it his habit to watch attentively allthat went on around him and to note it down. At the time of the meetingat Tilsit he asked the names of those who had come with Napoleon andabout the uniforms they wore, and listened attentively to words spokenby important personages. At the moment the Emperors went into thepavilion he looked at his watch, and did not forget to look at it againwhen Alexander came out. The interview had lasted an hour and fifty-three minutes. He noted this down that same evening, among other factshe felt to be of historic importance. As the Emperor's suite was a verysmall one, it was a matter of great importance, for a man who valued hissuccess in the service, to be at Tilsit on the occasion of thisinterview between the two Emperors, and having succeeded in this, Borisfelt that henceforth his position was fully assured. He had not onlybecome known, but people had grown accustomed to him and accepted him.Twice he had executed commissions to the Emperor himself, so that thelatter knew his face, and all those at court, far from cold-shoulderinghim as at first when they considered him a newcomer, would now have beensurprised had he been absent.Boris lodged with another adjutant, the Polish Count Zhilinski.Zhilinski, a Pole brought up in Paris, was rich, and passionately fondof the French, and almost every day of the stay at Tilsit, Frenchofficers of the Guard and from French headquarters were dining andlunching with him and Boris.On the evening of the twenty-fourth of June, Count Zhilinski arranged asupper for his French friends. The guest of honor was an aide-de-camp ofNapoleon's, there were also several French officers of the Guard, and apage of Napoleon's, a young lad of an old aristocratic French family.That same day, Rostov, profiting by the darkness to avoid beingrecognized in civilian dress, came to Tilsit and went to the lodgingoccupied by Boris and Zhilinski.Rostov, in common with the whole army from which he came, was far fromhaving experienced the change of feeling toward Napoleon and the French--who from being foes had suddenly become friends--that had taken placeat headquarters and in Boris. In the army, Bonaparte and the French werestill regarded with mingled feelings of anger, contempt, and fear. Onlyrecently, talking with one of Platov's Cossack officers, Rostov hadargued that if Napoleon were taken prisoner he would be treated not as asovereign, but as a criminal. Quite lately, happening to meet a woundedFrench colonel on the road, Rostov had maintained with heat that peacewas impossible between a legitimate sovereign and the criminalBonaparte. Rostov was therefore unpleasantly struck by the presence ofFrench officers in Boris' lodging, dressed in uniforms he had beenaccustomed to see from quite a different point of view from the outpostsof the flank. As soon as he noticed a French officer, who thrust hishead out of the door, that warlike feeling of hostility which he alwaysexperienced at the sight of the enemy suddenly seized him. He stopped atthe threshold and asked in Russian whether Drubetskoy lived there.Boris, hearing a strange voice in the anteroom, came out to meet him. Anexpression of annoyance showed itself for a moment on his face on firstrecognizing Rostov."Ah, it's you? Very glad, very glad to see you," he said, however,coming toward him with a smile. But Rostov had noticed his firstimpulse."I've come at a bad time I think. I should not have come, but I havebusiness," he said coldly."No, I only wonder how you managed to get away from your regiment. Dansun moment je suis a vous," * he said, answering someone who called him.* "In a minute I shall be at your disposal.""I see I'm intruding," Rostov repeated.The look of annoyance had already disappeared from Boris' face: havingevidently reflected and decided how to act, he very quietly took bothRostov's hands and led him into the next room. His eyes, lookingserenely and steadily at Rostov, seemed to be veiled by something, as ifscreened by blue spectacles of conventionality. So it seemed to Rostov."Oh, come now! As if you could come at a wrong time!" said Boris, and heled him into the room where the supper table was laid and introduced himto his guests, explaining that he was not a civilian, but an hussarofficer, and an old friend of his."Count Zhilinski--le Comte N. N.--le Capitaine S. S.," said he, naminghis guests. Rostov looked frowningly at the Frenchmen, bowedreluctantly, and remained silent.Zhilinski evidently did not receive this new Russian person verywillingly into his circle and did not speak to Rostov. Boris did notappear to notice the constraint the newcomer produced and, with the samepleasant composure and the same veiled look in his eyes with which hehad met Rostov, tried to enliven the conversation. One of the Frenchmen,with the politeness characteristic of his countrymen, addressed theobstinately taciturn Rostov, saying that the latter had probably come toTilsit to see the Emperor."No, I came on business," replied Rostov, briefly.Rostov had been out of humor from the moment he noticed the look ofdissatisfaction on Boris' face, and as always happens to those in a badhumor, it seemed to him that everyone regarded him with aversion andthat he was in everybody's way. He really was in their way, for he alonetook no part in the conversation which again became general. The looksthe visitors cast on him seemed to say: "And what is he sitting herefor?" He rose and went up to Boris."Anyhow, I'm in your way," he said in a low tone. "Come and talk over mybusiness and I'll go away.""Oh, no, not at all," said Boris. "But if you are tired, come and liedown in my room and have a rest.""Yes, really..."They went into the little room where Boris slept. Rostov, withoutsitting down, began at once, irritably (as if Boris were to blame insome way) telling him about Denisov's affair, asking him whether,through his general, he could and would intercede with the Emperor onDenisov's behalf and get Denisov's petition handed in. When he and Boriswere alone, Rostov felt for the first time that he could not look Borisin the face without a sense of awkwardness. Boris, with one leg crossedover the other and stroking his left hand with the slender fingers ofhis right, listened to Rostov as a general listens to the report of asubordinate, now looking aside and now gazing straight into Rostov'seyes with the same veiled look. Each time this happened Rostov feltuncomfortable and cast down his eyes."I have heard of such cases and know that His Majesty is very severe insuch affairs. I think it would be best not to bring it before theEmperor, but to apply to the commander of the corps.... But in general,I think...""So you don't want to do anything? Well then, say so!" Rostov almostshouted, not looking Boris in the face.Boris smiled."On the contrary, I will do what I can. Only I thought..."At that moment Zhilinski's voice was heard calling Boris."Well then, go, go, go..." said Rostov, and refusing supper andremaining alone in the little room, he walked up and down for a longtime, hearing the lighthearted French conversation from the next room.CHAPTER XXRostov had come to Tilsit the day least suitable for a petition onDenisov's behalf. He could not himself go to the general in attendanceas he was in mufti and had come to Tilsit without permission to do so,and Boris, even had he wished to, could not have done so on thefollowing day. On that day, June 27, the preliminaries of peace weresigned. The Emperors exchanged decorations: Alexander received the Crossof the Legion of Honor and Napoleon the Order of St. Andrew of the FirstDegree, and a dinner had been arranged for the evening, given by abattalion of the French Guards to the Preobrazhensk battalion. TheEmperors were to be present at that banquet.Rostov felt so ill at ease and uncomfortable with Boris that, when thelatter looked in after supper, he pretended to be asleep, and early nextmorning went away, avoiding Boris. In his civilian clothes and a roundhat, he wandered about the town, staring at the French and theiruniforms and at the streets and houses where the Russian and FrenchEmperors were staying. In a square he saw tables being set up andpreparations made for the dinner; he saw the Russian and French colorsdraped from side to side of the streets, with huge monograms A and N. Inthe windows of the houses also flags and bunting were displayed."Boris doesn't want to help me and I don't want to ask him. That'ssettled," thought Nicholas. "All is over between us, but I won't leavehere without having done all I can for Denisov and certainly not withoutgetting his letter to the Emperor. The Emperor!... He is here!" thoughtRostov, who had unconsciously returned to the house where Alexanderlodged.Saddled horses were standing before the house and the suite wereassembling, evidently preparing for the Emperor to come out."I may see him at any moment," thought Rostov. "If only I were to handthe letter direct to him and tell him all... could they really arrest mefor my civilian clothes? Surely not! He would understand on whose sidejustice lies. He understands everything, knows everything. Who can bemore just, more magnanimous than he? And even if they did arrest me forbeing here, what would it matter?" thought he, looking at an officer whowas entering the house the Emperor occupied. "After all, people do goin.... It's all nonsense! I'll go in and hand the letter to the Emperormyself so much the worse for Drubetskoy who drives me to it!" Andsuddenly with a determination he himself did not expect, Rostov felt forthe letter in his pocket and went straight to the house."No, I won't miss my opportunity now, as I did after Austerlitz," hethought, expecting every moment to meet the monarch, and conscious ofthe blood that rushed to his heart at the thought. "I will fall at hisfeet and beseech him. He will lift me up, will listen, and will eventhank me. 'I am happy when I can do good, but to remedy injustice is thegreatest happiness,'" Rostov fancied the sovereign saying. And passingpeople who looked after him with curiosity, he entered the porch of theEmperor's house.A broad staircase led straight up from the entry, and to the right hesaw a closed door. Below, under the staircase, was a door leading to thelower floor."Whom do you want?" someone inquired."To hand in a letter, a petition, to His Majesty," said Nicholas, with atremor in his voice."A petition? This way, to the officer on duty" (he was shown the doorleading downstairs), "only it won't be accepted."On hearing this indifferent voice, Rostov grew frightened at what he wasdoing; the thought of meeting the Emperor at any moment was sofascinating and consequently so alarming that he was ready to run away,but the official who had questioned him opened the door, and Rostoventered.A short stout man of about thirty, in white breeches and high boots anda batiste shirt that he had evidently only just put on, standing in thatroom, and his valet was buttoning on to the back of his breeches a newpair of handsome silk-embroidered braces that, for some reason,attracted Rostov's attention. This man was speaking to someone in theadjoining room."A good figure and in her first bloom," he was saying, but on seeingRostov, he stopped short and frowned."What is it? A petition?""What is it?" asked the person in the other room."Another petitioner," answered the man with the braces."Tell him to come later. He'll be coming out directly, we must go.""Later... later! Tomorrow. It's too late..."Rostov turned and was about to go, but the man in the braces stoppedhim."Whom have you come from? Who are you?""I come from Major Denisov," answered Rostov."Are you an officer?""Lieutenant Count Rostov.""What audacity! Hand it in through your commander. And go along withyou... go," and he continued to put on the uniform the valet handed him.Rostov went back into the hall and noticed that in the porch there weremany officers and generals in full parade uniform, whom he had to pass.Cursing his temerity, his heart sinking at the thought of findinghimself at any moment face to face with the Emperor and being put toshame and arrested in his presence, fully alive now to the improprietyof his conduct and repenting of it, Rostov, with downcast eyes, wasmaking his way out of the house through the brilliant suite when afamiliar voice called him and a hand detained him."What are you doing here, sir, in civilian dress?" asked a deep voice.It was a cavalry general who had obtained the Emperor's special favorduring this campaign, and who had formerly commanded the division inwhich Rostov was serving.Rostov, in dismay, began justifying himself, but seeing the kindly,jocular face of the general, he took him aside and in an excited voicetold him the whole affair, asking him to intercede for Denisov, whom thegeneral knew. Having heard Rostov to the end, the general shook his headgravely."I'm sorry, sorry for that fine fellow. Give me the letter."Hardly had Rostov handed him the letter and finished explainingDenisov's case, when hasty steps and the jingling of spurs were heard onthe stairs, and the general, leaving him, went to the porch. Thegentlemen of the Emperor's suite ran down the stairs and went to theirhorses. Hayne, the same groom who had been at Austerlitz, led up theEmperor's horse, and the faint creak of a footstep Rostov knew at oncewas heard on the stairs. Forgetting the danger of being recognized,Rostov went close to the porch, together with some inquisitivecivilians, and again, after two years, saw those features he adored:that same face and same look and step, and the same union of majesty andmildness.... And the feeling of enthusiasm and love for his sovereignrose again in Rostov's soul in all its old force. In the uniform of thePreobrazhensk regiment--white chamois-leather breeches and high boots--and wearing a star Rostov did not know (it was that of the Legiond'honneur), the monarch came out into the porch, putting on his glovesand carrying his hat under his arm. He stopped and looked about him,brightening everything around by his glance. He spoke a few words tosome of the generals, and, recognizing the former commander of Rostov'sdivision, smiled and beckoned to him.All the suite drew back and Rostov saw the general talking for some timeto the Emperor.The Emperor said a few words to him and took a step toward his horse.Again the crowd of members of the suite and street gazers (among whomwas Rostov) moved nearer to the Emperor. Stopping beside his horse, withhis hand on the saddle, the Emperor turned to the cavalry general andsaid in a loud voice, evidently wishing to be heard by all:"I cannot do it, General. I cannot, because the law is stronger than I,"and he raised his foot to the stirrup.The general bowed his head respectfully, and the monarch mounted androde down the street at a gallop. Beside himself with enthusiasm, Rostovran after him with the crowd.CHAPTER XXIThe Emperor rode to the square where, facing one another, a battalion ofthe Preobrazhensk regiment stood on the right and a battalion of theFrench Guards in their bearskin caps on the left.As the Tsar rode up to one flank of the battalions, which presentedarms, another group of horsemen galloped up to the opposite flank, andat the head of them Rostov recognized Napoleon. It could be no one else.He came at a gallop, wearing a small hat, a blue uniform open over awhite vest, and the St. Andrew ribbon over his shoulder. He was riding avery fine thoroughbred gray Arab horse with a crimson gold-embroideredsaddlecloth. On approaching Alexander he raised his hat, and as he didso, Rostov, with his cavalryman's eye, could not help noticing thatNapoleon did not sit well or firmly in the saddle. The battalionsshouted "Hurrah!" and "Vive l'Empereur!" Napoleon said something toAlexander, and both Emperors dismounted and took each other's hands.Napoleon's face wore an unpleasant and artificial smile. Alexander wassaying something affable to him.In spite of the trampling of the French gendarmes' horses, which werepushing back the crowd, Rostov kept his eyes on every movement ofAlexander and Bonaparte. It struck him as a surprise that Alexandertreated Bonaparte as an equal and that the latter was quite at ease withthe Tsar, as if such relations with an Emperor were an everyday matterto him.Alexander and Napoleon, with the long train of their suites, approachedthe right flank of the Preobrazhensk battalion and came straight up tothe crowd standing there. The crowd unexpectedly found itself so closeto the Emperors that Rostov, standing in the front row, was afraid hemight be recognized."Sire, I ask your permission to present the Legion of Honor to thebravest of your soldiers," said a sharp, precise voice, articulatingevery letter.This was said by the undersized Napoleon, looking up straight intoAlexander's eyes. Alexander listened attentively to what was said to himand, bending his head, smiled pleasantly."To him who has borne himself most bravely in this last war," addedNapoleon, accentuating each syllable, as with a composure and assuranceexasperating to Rostov, he ran his eyes over the Russian ranks drawn upbefore him, who all presented arms with their eyes fixed on theirEmperor."Will Your Majesty allow me to consult the colonel?" said Alexander andtook a few hasty steps toward Prince Kozlovski, the commander of thebattalion.Bonaparte meanwhile began taking the glove off his small white hand,tore it in doing so, and threw it away. An aide-de-camp behind himrushed forward and picked it up."To whom shall it be given?" the Emperor Alexander asked Koslovski, inRussian in a low voice."To whomever Your Majesty commands."The Emperor knit his brows with dissatisfaction and, glancing back,remarked:"But we must give him an answer."Kozlovski scanned the ranks resolutely and included Rostov in hisscrutiny."Can it be me?" thought Rostov."Lazarev!" the colonel called, with a frown, and Lazarev, the firstsoldier in the rank, stepped briskly forward."Where are you off to? Stop here!" voices whispered to Lazarev who didnot know where to go. Lazarev stopped, casting a sidelong look at hiscolonel in alarm. His face twitched, as often happens to soldiers calledbefore the ranks.Napoleon slightly turned his head, and put his plump little hand outbehind him as if to take something. The members of his suite, guessingat once what he wanted, moved about and whispered as they passedsomething from one to another, and a page--the same one Rostov had seenthe previous evening at Boris'--ran forward and, bowing respectfullyover the outstretched hand and not keeping it waiting a moment, laid init an Order on a red ribbon. Napoleon, without looking, pressed twofingers together and the badge was between them. Then he approachedLazarev (who rolled his eyes and persistently gazed at his own monarch),looked round at the Emperor Alexander to imply that what he was nowdoing was done for the sake of his ally, and the small white handholding the Order touched one of Lazarev's buttons. It was as ifNapoleon knew that it was only necessary for his hand to deign to touchthat soldier's breast for the soldier to be forever happy, rewarded, anddistinguished from everyone else in the world. Napoleon merely laid thecross on Lazarev's breast and, dropping his hand, turned towardAlexander as though sure that the cross would adhere there. And itreally did.Officious hands, Russian and French, immediately seized the cross andfastened it to the uniform. Lazarev glanced morosely at the little manwith white hands who was doing something to him and, still standingmotionless presenting arms, looked again straight into Alexander's eyes,as if asking whether he should stand there, or go away, or do somethingelse. But receiving no orders, he remained for some time in that rigidposition.The Emperors remounted and rode away. The Preobrazhensk battalion,breaking rank, mingled with the French Guards and sat down at the tablesprepared for them.Lazarev sat in the place of honor. Russian and French officers embracedhim, congratulated him, and pressed his hands. Crowds of officers andcivilians drew near merely to see him. A rumble of Russian and Frenchvoices and laughter filled the air round the tables in the square. Twoofficers with flushed faces, looking cheerful and happy, passed byRostov."What d'you think of the treat? All on silver plate," one of them wassaying. "Have you seen Lazarev?""I have.""Tomorrow, I hear, the Preobrazhenskis will give them a dinner.""Yes, but what luck for Lazarev! Twelve hundred francs' pension forlife.""Here's a cap, lads!" shouted a Preobrazhensk soldier, donning a shaggyFrench cap."It's a fine thing! First-rate!""Have you heard the password?" asked one Guards' officer of another."The day before yesterday it was 'Napoleon, France, bravoure';yesterday, 'Alexandre, Russie, grandeur.' One day our Emperor gives itand next day Napoleon. Tomorrow our Emperor will send a St. George'sCross to the bravest of the French Guards. It has to be done. He mustrespond in kind."Boris, too, with his friend Zhilinski, came to see the Preobrazhenskbanquet. On his way back, he noticed Rostov standing by the corner of ahouse."Rostov! How d'you do? We missed one another," he said, and could notrefrain from asking what was the matter, so strangely dismal andtroubled was Rostov's face."Nothing, nothing," replied Rostov."You'll call round?""Yes, I will."Rostov stood at that corner for a long time, watching the feast from adistance. In his mind, a painful process was going on which he could notbring to a conclusion. Terrible doubts rose in his soul. Now heremembered Denisov with his changed expression, his submission, and thewhole hospital, with arms and legs torn off and its dirt and disease. Sovividly did he recall that hospital stench of dead flesh that he lookedround to see where the smell came from. Next he thought of that self-satisfied Bonaparte, with his small white hand, who was now an Emperor,liked and respected by Alexander. Then why those severed arms and legsand those dead men?... Then again he thought of Lazarev rewarded andDenisov punished and unpardoned. He caught himself harboring suchstrange thoughts that he was frightened.The smell of the food the Preobrazhenskis were eating and a sense ofhunger recalled him from these reflections; he had to get something toeat before going away. He went to a hotel he had noticed that morning.There he found so many people, among them officers who, like himself,had come in civilian clothes, that he had difficulty in getting adinner. Two officers of his own division joined him. The conversationnaturally turned on the peace. The officers, his comrades, like most ofthe army, were dissatisfied with the peace concluded after the battle ofFriedland. They said that had we held out a little longer Napoleon wouldhave been done for, as his troops had neither provisions nor ammunition.Nicholas ate and drank (chiefly the latter) in silence. He finished acouple of bottles of wine by himself. The process in his mind went ontormenting him without reaching a conclusion. He feared to give way tohis thoughts, yet could not get rid of them. Suddenly, on one of theofficers' saying that it was humiliating to look at the French, Rostovbegan shouting with uncalled-for wrath, and therefore much to thesurprise of the officers:"How can you judge what's best?" he cried, the blood suddenly rushing tohis face. "How can you judge the Emperor's actions? What right have weto argue? We cannot comprehend either the Emperor's aims or hisactions!""But I never said a word about the Emperor!" said the officer,justifying himself, and unable to understand Rostov's outburst, excepton the supposition that he was drunk.But Rostov did not listen to him."We are not diplomatic officials, we are soldiers and nothing more," hewent on. "If we are ordered to die, we must die. If we're punished, itmeans that we have deserved it, it's not for us to judge. If the Emperorpleases to recognize Bonaparte as Emperor and to conclude an alliancewith him, it means that that is the right thing to do. If once we beginjudging and arguing about everything, nothing sacred will be left! Thatway we shall be saying there is no God--nothing!" shouted Nicholas,banging the table--very little to the point as it seemed to hislisteners, but quite relevantly to the course of his own thoughts."Our business is to do our duty, to fight and not to think! That'sall...." said he."And to drink," said one of the officers, not wishing to quarrel."Yes, and to drink," assented Nicholas. "Hullo there! Another bottle!"he shouted.In 1808 the Emperor Alexander went to Erfurt for a fresh interview withthe Emperor Napoleon, and in the upper circles of Petersburg there wasmuch talk of the grandeur of this important meeting.CHAPTER XXIIIn 1809 the intimacy between "the world's two arbiters," as Napoleon andAlexander were called, was such that when Napoleon declared war onAustria a Russian corps crossed the frontier to co-operate with our oldenemy Bonaparte against our old ally the Emperor of Austria, and incourt circles the possibility of marriage between Napoleon and one ofAlexander's sisters was spoken of. But besides considerations of foreignpolicy, the attention of Russian society was at that time keenlydirected on the internal changes that were being undertaken in all thedepartments of government.Life meanwhile--real life, with its essential interests of health andsickness, toil and rest, and its intellectual interests in thought,science, poetry, music, love, friendship, hatred, and passions--went onas usual, independently of and apart from political friendship or enmitywith Napoleon Bonaparte and from all the schemes of reconstruction.BOOK SIX: 1808 - 10CHAPTER IPrince Andrew had spent two years continuously in the country.All the plans Pierre had attempted on his estates--and constantlychanging from one thing to another had never accomplished--were carriedout by Prince Andrew without display and without perceptible difficulty.He had in the highest degree a practical tenacity which Pierre lacked,and without fuss or strain on his part this set things going.On one of his estates the three hundred serfs were liberated and becamefree agricultural laborers--this being one of the first examples of thekind in Russia. On other estates the serfs' compulsory labor wascommuted for a quitrent. A trained midwife was engaged for Bogucharovoat his expense, and a priest was paid to teach reading and writing tothe children of the peasants and household serfs.Prince Andrew spent half his time at Bald Hills with his father and hisson, who was still in the care of nurses. The other half he spent in"Bogucharovo Cloister," as his father called Prince Andrew's estate.Despite the indifference to the affairs of the world he had expressed toPierre, he diligently followed all that went on, received many books,and to his surprise noticed that when he or his father had visitors fromPetersburg, the very vortex of life, these people lagged behind himself--who never left the country--in knowledge of what was happening in homeand foreign affairs.Besides being occupied with his estates and reading a great variety ofbooks, Prince Andrew was at this time busy with a critical survey of ourlast two unfortunate campaigns, and with drawing up a proposal for areform of the army rules and regulations.In the spring of 1809 he went to visit the Ryazan estates which had beeninherited by his son, whose guardian he was.Warmed by the spring sunshine he sat in the caleche looking at the newgrass, the first leaves on the birches, and the first puffs of whitespring clouds floating across the clear blue sky. He was not thinking ofanything, but looked absent-mindedly and cheerfully from side to side.They crossed the ferry where he had talked with Pierre the year before.They went through the muddy village, past threshing floors and greenfields of winter rye, downhill where snow still lodged near the bridge,uphill where the clay had been liquefied by the rain, past strips ofstubble land and bushes touched with green here and there, and into abirch forest growing on both sides of the road. In the forest it wasalmost hot, no wind could be felt. The birches with their sticky greenleaves were motionless, and lilac-colored flowers and the first bladesof green grass were pushing up and lifting last year's leaves. Thecoarse evergreen color of the small fir trees scattered here and thereamong the birches was an unpleasant reminder of winter. On entering theforest the horses began to snort and sweated visibly.Peter the footman made some remark to the coachman; the latter assented.But apparently the coachman's sympathy was not enough for Peter, and heturned on the box toward his master."How pleasant it is, your excellency!" he said with a respectful smile."What?""It's pleasant, your excellency!""What is he talking about?" thought Prince Andrew. "Oh, the spring, Isuppose," he thought as he turned round. "Yes, really everything isgreen already.... How early! The birches and cherry and alders too arecoming out.... But the oaks show no sign yet. Ah, here is one oak!"At the edge of the road stood an oak. Probably ten times the age of thebirches that formed the forest, it was ten times as thick and twice astall as they. It was an enormous tree, its girth twice as great as a mancould embrace, and evidently long ago some of its branches had beenbroken off and its bark scarred. With its huge ungainly limbs sprawlingunsymmetrically, and its gnarled hands and fingers, it stood an aged,stern, and scornful monster among the smiling birch trees. Only thedead-looking evergreen firs dotted about in the forest, and this oak,refused to yield to the charm of spring or notice either the spring orthe sunshine."Spring, love, happiness!" this oak seemed to say. "Are you not weary ofthat stupid, meaningless, constantly repeated fraud? Always the same andalways a fraud? There is no spring, no sun, no happiness! Look at thosecramped dead firs, ever the same, and at me too, sticking out my brokenand barked fingers just where they have grown, whether from my back ormy sides: as they have grown so I stand, and I do not believe in yourhopes and your lies."As he passed through the forest Prince Andrew turned several times tolook at that oak, as if expecting something from it. Under the oak, too,were flowers and grass, but it stood among them scowling, rigid,misshapen, and grim as ever."Yes, the oak is right, a thousand times right," thought Prince Andrew."Let others--the young--yield afresh to that fraud, but we know life,our life is finished!"A whole sequence of new thoughts, hopeless but mournfully pleasant, rosein his soul in connection with that tree. During this journey he, as itwere, considered his life afresh and arrived at his old conclusion,restful in its hopelessness: that it was not for him to begin anythinganew--but that he must live out his life, content to do no harm, and notdisturbing himself or desiring anything.CHAPTER IIPrince Andrew had to see the Marshal of the Nobility for the district inconnection with the affairs of the Ryazan estate of which he wastrustee. This Marshal was Count Ilya Rostov, and in the middle of MayPrince Andrew went to visit him.It was now hot spring weather. The whole forest was already clothed ingreen. It was dusty and so hot that on passing near water one longed tobathe.Prince Andrew, depressed and preoccupied with the business about whichhe had to speak to the Marshal, was driving up the avenue in the groundsof the Rostovs' house at Otradnoe. He heard merry girlish cries behindsome trees on the right and saw a group of girls running to cross thepath of his caleche. Ahead of the rest and nearer to him ran a dark-haired, remarkably slim, pretty girl in a yellow chintz dress, with awhite handkerchief on her head from under which loose locks of hairescaped. The girl was shouting something but, seeing that he was astranger, ran back laughing without looking at him.Suddenly, he did not know why, he felt a pang. The day was so beautiful,the sun so bright, everything around so gay, but that slim pretty girldid not know, or wish to know, of his existence and was contented andcheerful in her own separate--probably foolish--but bright and happylife. "What is she so glad about? What is she thinking of? Not of themilitary regulations or of the arrangement of the Ryazan serfs'quitrents. Of what is she thinking? Why is she so happy?" Prince Andrewasked himself with instinctive curiosity.In 1809 Count Ilya Rostov was living at Otradnoe just as he had done informer years, that is, entertaining almost the whole province withhunts, theatricals, dinners, and music. He was glad to see PrinceAndrew, as he was to see any new visitor, and insisted on his stayingthe night.During the dull day, in the course of which he was entertained by hiselderly hosts and by the more important of the visitors (the old count'shouse was crowded on account of an approaching name day), Prince Andrewrepeatedly glanced at Natasha, gay and laughing among the youngermembers of the company, and asked himself each time, "What is shethinking about? Why is she so glad?"That night, alone in new surroundings, he was long unable to sleep. Heread awhile and then put out his candle, but relit it. It was hot in theroom, the inside shutters of which were closed. He was cross with thestupid old man (as he called Rostov), who had made him stay by assuringhim that some necessary documents had not yet arrived from town, and hewas vexed with himself for having stayed.He got up and went to the window to open it. As soon as he opened theshutters the moonlight, as if it had long been watching for this, burstinto the room. He opened the casement. The night was fresh, bright, andvery still. Just before the window was a row of pollard trees, lookingblack on one side and with a silvery light on the other. Beneath thetrees grew some kind of lush, wet, bushy vegetation with silver-litleaves and stems here and there. Farther back beyond the dark trees aroof glittered with dew, to the right was a leafy tree with brilliantlywhite trunk and branches, and above it shone the moon, nearly at itsfull, in a pale, almost starless, spring sky. Prince Andrew leaned hiselbows on the window ledge and his eyes rested on that sky.His room was on the first floor. Those in the rooms above were alsoawake. He heard female voices overhead."Just once more," said a girlish voice above him which Prince Andrewrecognized at once."But when are you coming to bed?" replied another voice."I won't, I can't sleep, what's the use? Come now for the last time."Two girlish voices sang a musical passage--the end of some song."Oh, how lovely! Now go to sleep, and there's an end of it.""You go to sleep, but I can't," said the first voice, coming nearer tothe window. She was evidently leaning right out, for the rustle of herdress and even her breathing could be heard. Everything was stone-still,like the moon and its light and the shadows. Prince Andrew, too, darednot stir, for fear of betraying his unintentional presence."Sonya! Sonya!" he again heard the first speaker. "Oh, how can yousleep? Only look how glorious it is! Ah, how glorious! Do wake up,Sonya!" she said almost with tears in her voice. "There never, never wassuch a lovely night before!"Sonya made some reluctant reply."Do just come and see what a moon!... Oh, how lovely! Come here....Darling, sweetheart, come here! There, you see? I feel like sitting downon my heels, putting my arms round my knees like this, straining tight,as tight as possible, and flying away! Like this....""Take care, you'll fall out."He heard the sound of a scuffle and Sonya's disapproving voice: "It'spast one o'clock.""Oh, you only spoil things for me. All right, go, go!"Again all was silent, but Prince Andrew knew she was still sittingthere. From time to time he heard a soft rustle and at times a sigh."O God, O God! What does it mean?" she suddenly exclaimed. "To bed then,if it must be!" and she slammed the casement."For her I might as well not exist!" thought Prince Andrew while helistened to her voice, for some reason expecting yet fearing that shemight say something about him. "There she is again! As if it were onpurpose," thought he.In his soul there suddenly arose such an unexpected turmoil of youthfulthoughts and hopes, contrary to the whole tenor of his life, that unableto explain his condition to himself he lay down and fell asleep at once.CHAPTER IIINext morning, having taken leave of no one but the count, and notwaiting for the ladies to appear, Prince Andrew set off for home.It was already the beginning of June when on his return journey he droveinto the birch forest where the gnarled old oak had made so strange andmemorable an impression on him. In the forest the harness bells soundedyet more muffled than they had done six weeks before, for now all wasthick, shady, and dense, and the young firs dotted about in the forestdid not jar on the general beauty but, lending themselves to the moodaround, were delicately green with fluffy young shoots.The whole day had been hot. Somewhere a storm was gathering, but only asmall cloud had scattered some raindrops lightly, sprinkling the roadand the sappy leaves. The left side of the forest was dark in the shade,the right side glittered in the sunlight, wet and shiny and scarcelyswayed by the breeze. Everything was in blossom, the nightingalestrilled, and their voices reverberated now near, now far away."Yes, here in this forest was that oak with which I agreed," thoughtPrince Andrew. "But where is it?" he again wondered, gazing at the leftside of the road, and without recognizing it he looked with admirationat the very oak he sought. The old oak, quite transfigured, spreadingout a canopy of sappy dark-green foliage, stood rapt and slightlytrembling in the rays of the evening sun. Neither gnarled fingers norold scars nor old doubts and sorrows were any of them in evidence now.Through the hard century-old bark, even where there were no twigs,leaves had sprouted such as one could hardly believe the old veterancould have produced."Yes, it is the same oak," thought Prince Andrew, and all at once he wasseized by an unreasoning springtime feeling of joy and renewal. All thebest moments of his life suddenly rose to his memory. Austerlitz withthe lofty heavens, his wife's dead reproachful face, Pierre at theferry, that girl thrilled by the beauty of the night, and that nightitself and the moon, and.... all this rushed suddenly to his mind."No, life is not over at thirty-one!" Prince Andrew suddenly decidedfinally and decisively. "It is not enough for me to know what I have inme--everyone must know it: Pierre, and that young girl who wanted to flyaway into the sky, everyone must know me, so that my life may not belived for myself alone while others live so apart from it, but so thatit may be reflected in them all, and they and I may live in harmony!"On reaching home Prince Andrew decided to go to Petersburg that autumnand found all sorts of reasons for this decision. A whole series ofsensible and logical considerations showing it to be essential for himto go to Petersburg, and even to re-enter the service, kept springing upin his mind. He could not now understand how he could ever even havedoubted the necessity of taking an active share in life, just as a monthbefore he had not understood how the idea of leaving the quiet countrycould ever enter his head. It now seemed clear to him that all hisexperience of life must be senselessly wasted unless he applied it tosome kind of work and again played an active part in life. He did noteven remember how formerly, on the strength of similar wretched logicalarguments, it had seemed obvious that he would be degrading himself ifhe now, after the lessons he had had in life, allowed himself to believein the possibility of being useful and in the possibility of happinessor love. Now reason suggested quite the opposite. After that journey toRyazan he found the country dull; his former pursuits no longerinterested him, and often when sitting alone in his study he got up,went to the mirror, and gazed a long time at his own face. Then he wouldturn away to the portrait of his dead Lise, who with hair curled a lagrecque looked tenderly and gaily at him out of the gilt frame. She didnot now say those former terrible words to him, but looked simply,merrily, and inquisitively at him. And Prince Andrew, crossing his armsbehind him, long paced the room, now frowning, now smiling, as hereflected on those irrational, inexpressible thoughts, secret as acrime, which altered his whole life and were connected with Pierre, withfame, with the girl at the window, the oak, and woman's beauty and love.And if anyone came into his room at such moments he was particularlycold, stern, and above all unpleasantly logical."My dear," Princess Mary entering at such a moment would say, "littleNicholas can't go out today, it's very cold.""If it were hot," Prince Andrew would reply at such times very dryly tohis sister, "he could go out in his smock, but as it is cold he mustwear warm clothes, which were designed for that purpose. That is whatfollows from the fact that it is cold; and not that a child who needsfresh air should remain at home," he would add with extreme logic, as ifpunishing someone for those secret illogical emotions that stirredwithin him.At such moments Princess Mary would think how intellectual work driesmen up.CHAPTER IVPrince Andrew arrived in Petersburg in August, 1809. It was the timewhen the youthful Speranski was at the zenith of his fame and hisreforms were being pushed forward with the greatest energy. That sameAugust the Emperor was thrown from his caleche, injured his leg, andremained three weeks at Peterhof, receiving Speranski every day and noone else. At that time the two famous decrees were being prepared thatso agitated society--abolishing court ranks and introducing examinationsto qualify for the grades of Collegiate Assessor and State Councilor--and not merely these but a whole state constitution, intended to changethe existing order of government in Russia: legal, administrative, andfinancial, from the Council of State down to the district tribunals. Nowthose vague liberal dreams with which the Emperor Alexander had ascendedthe throne, and which he had tried to put into effect with the aid ofhis associates, Czartoryski, Novosiltsev, Kochubey, and Strogonov--whomhe himself in jest had called his Comite de salut public--were takingshape and being realized.Now all these men were replaced by Speranski on the civil side, andArakcheev on the military. Soon after his arrival Prince Andrew, as agentleman of the chamber, presented himself at court and at a levee. TheEmperor, though he met him twice, did not favor him with a single word.It had always seemed to Prince Andrew before that he was antipathetic tothe Emperor and that the latter disliked his face and personalitygenerally, and in the cold, repellent glance the Emperor gave him, henow found further confirmation of this surmise. The courtiers explainedthe Emperor's neglect of him by His Majesty's displeasure at Bolkonski'snot having served since 1805."I know myself that one cannot help one's sympathies and antipathies,"thought Prince Andrew, "so it will not do to present my proposal for thereform of the army regulations to the Emperor personally, but theproject will speak for itself."He mentioned what he had written to an old field marshal, a friend ofhis father's. The field marshal made an appointment to see him, receivedhim graciously, and promised to inform the Emperor. A few days laterPrince Andrew received notice that he was to go to see the Minister ofWar, Count Arakcheev.On the appointed day Prince Andrew entered Count Arakcheev's waitingroom at nine in the morning.He did not know Arakcheev personally, had never seen him, and all he hadheard of him inspired him with but little respect for the man."He is Minister of War, a man trusted by the Emperor, and I need notconcern myself about his personal qualities: he has been commissioned toconsider my project, so he alone can get it adopted," thought PrinceAndrew as he waited among a number of important and unimportant peoplein Count Arakcheev's waiting room.During his service, chiefly as an adjutant, Prince Andrew had seen theanterooms of many important men, and the different types of such roomswere well known to him. Count Arakcheev's anteroom had quite a specialcharacter. The faces of the unimportant people awaiting their turn foran audience showed embarrassment and servility; the faces of those ofhigher rank expressed a common feeling of awkwardness, covered by a maskof unconcern and ridicule of themselves, their situation, and the personfor whom they were waiting. Some walked thoughtfully up and down, otherswhispered and laughed. Prince Andrew heard the nickname "SilaAndreevich" and the words, "Uncle will give it to us hot," in referenceto Count Arakcheev. One general (an important personage), evidentlyfeeling offended at having to wait so long, sat crossing and uncrossinghis legs and smiling contemptuously to himself.But the moment the door opened one feeling alone appeared on all faces--that of fear. Prince Andrew for the second time asked the adjutant onduty to take in his name, but received an ironical look and was toldthat his turn would come in due course. After some others had been shownin and out of the minister's room by the adjutant on duty, an officerwho struck Prince Andrew by his humiliated and frightened air wasadmitted at that terrible door. This officer's audience lasted a longtime. Then suddenly the grating sound of a harsh voice was heard fromthe other side of the door, and the officer--with pale face andtrembling lips--came out and passed through the waiting room, clutchinghis head.After this Prince Andrew was conducted to the door and the officer onduty said in a whisper, "To the right, at the window."Prince Andrew entered a plain tidy room and saw at the table a man offorty with a long waist, a long closely cropped head, deep wrinkles,scowling brows above dull greenish-hazel eyes and an overhanging rednose. Arakcheev turned his head toward him without looking at him."What is your petition?" asked Arakcheev."I am not petitioning, your excellency," returned Prince Andrew quietly.Arakcheev's eyes turned toward him."Sit down," said he. "Prince Bolkonski?""I am not petitioning about anything. His Majesty the Emperor hasdeigned to send your excellency a project submitted by me...""You see, my dear sir, I have read your project," interrupted Arakcheev,uttering only the first words amiably and then--again without looking atPrince Andrew--relapsing gradually into a tone of grumbling contempt."You are proposing new military laws? There are many laws but no one tocarry out the old ones. Nowadays everybody designs laws, it is easierwriting than doing.""I came at His Majesty the Emperor's wish to learn from your excellencyhow you propose to deal with the memorandum I have presented," saidPrince Andrew politely."I have endorsed a resolution on your memorandum and sent it to thecommittee. I do not approve of it," said Arakcheev, rising and taking apaper from his writing table. "Here!" and he handed it to Prince Andrew.Across the paper was scrawled in pencil, without capital letters,misspelled, and without punctuation: "Unsoundly constructed becauseresembles an imitation of the French military code and from the Articlesof War needlessly deviating.""To what committee has the memorandum been referred?" inquired PrinceAndrew."To the Committee on Army Regulations, and I have recommended that yourhonor should be appointed a member, but without a salary."Prince Andrew smiled."I don't want one.""A member without salary," repeated Arakcheev. "I have the honor... Eh!Call the next one! Who else is there?" he shouted, bowing to PrinceAndrew.CHAPTER VWhile waiting for the announcement of his appointment to the committeePrince Andrew looked up his former acquaintances, particularly those heknew to be in power and whose aid he might need. In Petersburg he nowexperienced the same feeling he had had on the eve of a battle, whentroubled by anxious curiosity and irresistibly attracted to the rulingcircles where the future, on which the fate of millions depended, wasbeing shaped. From the irritation of the older men, the curiosity of theuninitiated, the reserve of the initiated, the hurry and preoccupationof everyone, and the innumerable committees and commissions of whoseexistence he learned every day, he felt that now, in 1809, here inPetersburg a vast civil conflict was in preparation, the commander inchief of which was a mysterious person he did not know, but who wassupposed to be a man of genius--Speranski. And this movement ofreconstruction of which Prince Andrew had a vague idea, and Speranskiits chief promoter, began to interest him so keenly that the question ofthe army regulations quickly receded to a secondary place in hisconsciousness.Prince Andrew was most favorably placed to secure good reception in thehighest and most diverse Petersburg circles of the day. The reformingparty cordially welcomed and courted him, in the first place because hewas reputed to be clever and very well read, and secondly because byliberating his serfs he had obtained the reputation of being a liberal.The party of the old and dissatisfied, who censured the innovations,turned to him expecting his sympathy in their disapproval of thereforms, simply because he was the son of his father. The femininesociety world welcomed him gladly, because he was rich, distinguished, agood match, and almost a newcomer, with a halo of romance on account ofhis supposed death and the tragic loss of his wife. Besides this thegeneral opinion of all who had known him previously was that he hadgreatly improved during these last five years, having softened and grownmore manly, lost his former affectation, pride, and contemptuous irony,and acquired the serenity that comes with years. People talked abouthim, were interested in him, and wanted to meet him.The day after his interview with Count Arakcheev, Prince Andrew spentthe evening at Count Kochubey's. He told the count of his interview withSila Andreevich (Kochubey spoke of Arakcheev by that nickname with thesame vague irony Prince Andrew had noticed in the Minister of War'santeroom)."Mon cher, even in this case you can't do without Michael MikhaylovichSperanski. He manages everything. I'll speak to him. He has promised tocome this evening.""What has Speranski to do with the army regulations?" asked PrinceAndrew.Kochubey shook his head smilingly, as if surprised at Bolkonski'ssimplicity."We were talking to him about you a few days ago," Kochubey continued,"and about your freed plowmen.""Oh, is it you, Prince, who have freed your serfs?" said an old man ofCatherine's day, turning contemptuously toward Bolkonski."It was a small estate that brought in no profit," replied PrinceAndrew, trying to extenuate his action so as not to irritate the old manuselessly."Afraid of being late..." said the old man, looking at Kochubey."There's one thing I don't understand," he continued. "Who will plow theland if they are set free? It is easy to write laws, but difficult torule.... Just the same as now--I ask you, Count--who will be heads ofthe departments when everybody has to pass examinations?""Those who pass the examinations, I suppose," replied Kochubey, crossinghis legs and glancing round."Well, I have Pryanichnikov serving under me, a splendid man, apriceless man, but he's sixty. Is he to go up for examination?""Yes, that's a difficulty, as education is not at all general, but..."Count Kochubey did not finish. He rose, took Prince Andrew by the arm,and went to meet a tall, bald, fair man of about forty with a large openforehead and a long face of unusual and peculiar whiteness, who was justentering. The newcomer wore a blue swallow-tail coat with a crosssuspended from his neck and a star on his left breast. It was Speranski.Prince Andrew recognized him at once, and felt a throb within him, ashappens at critical moments of life. Whether it was from respect, envy,or anticipation, he did not know. Speranski's whole figure was of apeculiar type that made him easily recognizable. In the society in whichPrince Andrew lived he had never seen anyone who together with awkwardand clumsy gestures possessed such calmness and self-assurance; he hadnever seen so resolute yet gentle an expression as that in those half-closed, rather humid eyes, or so firm a smile that expressed nothing;nor had he heard such a refined, smooth, soft voice; above all he hadnever seen such delicate whiteness of face or hands--hands which werebroad, but very plump, soft, and white. Such whiteness and softnessPrince Andrew had only seen on the faces of soldiers who had been longin hospital. This was Speranski, Secretary of State, reporter to theEmperor and his companion at Erfurt, where he had more than once met andtalked with Napoleon.Speranski did not shift his eyes from one face to another as peopleinvoluntarily do on entering a large company and was in no hurry tospeak. He spoke slowly, with assurance that he would be listened to, andhe looked only at the person with whom he was conversing.Prince Andrew followed Speranski's every word and movement withparticular attention. As happens to some people, especially to men whojudge those near to them severely, he always on meeting anyone new--especially anyone whom, like Speranski, he knew by reputation--expectedto discover in him the perfection of human qualities.Speranski told Kochubey he was sorry he had been unable to come sooneras he had been detained at the palace. He did not say that the Emperorhad kept him, and Prince Andrew noticed this affectation of modesty.When Kochubey introduced Prince Andrew, Speranski slowly turned his eyesto Bolkonski with his customary smile and looked at him in silence."I am very glad to make your acquaintance. I had heard of you, aseveryone has," he said after a pause.Kochubey said a few words about the reception Arakcheev had givenBolkonski. Speranski smiled more markedly."The chairman of the Committee on Army Regulations is my good friendMonsieur Magnitski," he said, fully articulating every word andsyllable, "and if you like I can put you in touch with him." He pausedat the full stop. "I hope you will find him sympathetic and ready to co-operate in promoting all that is reasonable."A circle soon formed round Speranski, and the old man who had talkedabout his subordinate Pryanichnikov addressed a question to him.Prince Andrew without joining in the conversation watched every movementof Speranski's: this man, not long since an insignificant divinitystudent, who now, Bolkonski thought, held in his hands--those plumpwhite hands--the fate of Russia. Prince Andrew was struck by theextraordinarily disdainful composure with which Speranski answered theold man. He appeared to address condescending words to him from animmeasurable height. When the old man began to speak too loud, Speranskismiled and said he could not judge of the advantage or disadvantage ofwhat pleased the sovereign.Having talked for a little while in the general circle, Speranski roseand coming up to Prince Andrew took him along to the other end of theroom. It was clear that he thought it necessary to interest himself inBolkonski."I had no chance to talk with you, Prince, during the animatedconversation in which that venerable gentleman involved me," he saidwith a mildly contemptuous smile, as if intimating by that smile that heand Prince Andrew understood the insignificance of the people with whomhe had just been talking. This flattered Prince Andrew. "I have known ofyou for a long time: first from your action with regard to your serfs, afirst example, of which it is very desirable that there should be moreimitators; and secondly because you are one of those gentlemen of thechamber who have not considered themselves offended by the new decreeconcerning the ranks allotted to courtiers, which is causing so muchgossip and tittle-tattle.""No," said Prince Andrew, "my father did not wish me to take advantageof the privilege. I began the service from the lower grade.""Your father, a man of the last century, evidently stands above ourcontemporaries who so condemn this measure which merely reestablishesnatural justice.""I think, however, that these condemnations have some ground," returnedPrince Andrew, trying to resist Speranski's influence, of which he beganto be conscious. He did not like to agree with him in everything andfelt a wish to contradict. Though he usually spoke easily and well, hefelt a difficulty in expressing himself now while talking withSperanski. He was too much absorbed in observing the famous man'spersonality."Grounds of personal ambition maybe," Speranski put in quietly."And of state interest to some extent," said Prince Andrew."What do you mean?" asked Speranski quietly, lowering his eyes."I am an admirer of Montesquieu," replied Prince Andrew, "and his ideathat le principe des monarchies est l'honneur me parait incontestable.Certains droits et privileges de la noblesse me paraissent etre desmoyens de soutenir ce sentiment." ** "The principle of monarchies is honor seems to me incontestable.Certain rights and privileges for the aristocracy appear to me a meansof maintaining that sentiment."The smile vanished from Speranski's white face, which was much improvedby the change. Probably Prince Andrew's thought interested him."Si vous envisagez la question sous ce point de vue," * he began,pronouncing French with evident difficulty, and speaking even slowerthan in Russian but quite calmly.* "If you regard the question from that point of view."Speranski went on to say that honor, l'honneur, cannot be upheld byprivileges harmful to the service; that honor, l'honneur, is either anegative concept of not doing what is blameworthy or it is a source ofemulation in pursuit of commendation and rewards, which recognize it.His arguments were concise, simple, and clear."An institution upholding honor, the source of emulation, is one similarto the Legion d'honneur of the great Emperor Napoleon, not harmful buthelpful to the success of the service, but not a class or courtprivilege.""I do not dispute that, but it cannot be denied that court privilegeshave attained the same end," returned Prince Andrew. "Every courtierconsiders himself bound to maintain his position worthily.""Yet you do not care to avail yourself of the privilege, Prince," saidSperanski, indicating by a smile that he wished to finish amiably anargument which was embarrassing for his companion. "If you will do methe honor of calling on me on Wednesday," he added, "I will, aftertalking with Magnitski, let you know what may interest you, and shallalso have the pleasure of a more detailed chat with you."Closing his eyes, he bowed a la francaise, without taking leave, andtrying to attract as little attention as possible, he left the room.CHAPTER VIDuring the first weeks of his stay in Petersburg Prince Andrew felt thewhole trend of thought he had formed during his life of seclusion quiteovershadowed by the trifling cares that engrossed him in that city.On returning home in the evening he would jot down in his notebook fouror five necessary calls or appointments for certain hours. The mechanismof life, the arrangement of the day so as to be in time everywhere,absorbed the greater part of his vital energy. He did nothing, did noteven think or find time to think, but only talked, and talkedsuccessfully, of what he had thought while in the country.He sometimes noticed with dissatisfaction that he repeated the sameremark on the same day in different circles. But he was so busy forwhole days together that he had no time to notice that he was thinkingof nothing.As he had done on their first meeting at Kochubey's, Speranski produceda strong impression on Prince Andrew on the Wednesday, when he receivedhim tte--tte at his own house and talked to him long andconfidentially.To Bolkonski so many people appeared contemptible and insignificantcreatures, and he so longed to find in someone the living ideal of thatperfection toward which he strove, that he readily believed that inSperanski he had found this ideal of a perfectly rational and virtuousman. Had Speranski sprung from the same class as himself and possessedthe same breeding and traditions, Bolkonski would soon have discoveredhis weak, human, unheroic sides; but as it was, Speranski's strange andlogical turn of mind inspired him with respect all the more because hedid not quite understand him. Moreover, Speranski, either because heappreciated the other's capacity or because he considered it necessaryto win him to his side, showed off his dispassionate calm reasonablenessbefore Prince Andrew and flattered him with that subtle flattery whichgoes hand in hand with self-assurance and consists in a tacit assumptionthat one's companion is the only man besides oneself capable ofunderstanding the folly of the rest of mankind and the reasonablenessand profundity of one's own ideas.During their long conversation on Wednesday evening, Speranski more thanonce remarked: "We regard everything that is above the common level ofrooted custom..." or, with a smile: "But we want the wolves to be fedand the sheep to be safe..." or: "They cannot understand this..." andall in a way that seemed to say: "We, you and I, understand what theyare and who we are."This first long conversation with Speranski only strengthened in PrinceAndrew the feeling he had experienced toward him at their first meeting.He saw in him a remarkable, clear-thinking man of vast intellect who byhis energy and persistence had attained power, which he was using solelyfor the welfare of Russia. In Prince Andrew's eyes Speranski was the manhe would himself have wished to be--one who explained all the facts oflife reasonably, considered important only what was rational, and wascapable of applying the standard of reason to everything. Everythingseemed so simple and clear in Speranski's exposition that Prince Andrewinvoluntarily agreed with him about everything. If he replied andargued, it was only because he wished to maintain his independence andnot submit to Speranski's opinions entirely. Everything was right andeverything was as it should be: only one thing disconcerted PrinceAndrew. This was Speranski's cold, mirrorlike look, which did not allowone to penetrate to his soul, and his delicate white hands, which PrinceAndrew involuntarily watched as one does watch the hands of those whopossess power. This mirrorlike gaze and those delicate hands irritatedPrince Andrew, he knew not why. He was unpleasantly struck, too, by theexcessive contempt for others that he observed in Speranski, and by thediversity of lines of argument he used to support his opinions. He madeuse of every kind of mental device, except analogy, and passed tooboldly, it seemed to Prince Andrew, from one to another. Now he wouldtake up the position of a practical man and condemn dreamers; now thatof a satirist, and laugh ironically at his opponents; now grow severelylogical, or suddenly rise to the realm of metaphysics. (This lastresource was one he very frequently employed.) He would transfer aquestion to metaphysical heights, pass on to definitions of space, time,and thought, and, having deduced the refutation he needed, would againdescend to the level of the original discussion.In general the trait of Speranski's mentality which struck Prince Andrewmost was his absolute and unshakable belief in the power and authorityof reason. It was evident that the thought could never occur to himwhich to Prince Andrew seemed so natural, namely, that it is after allimpossible to express all one thinks; and that he had never felt thedoubt, "Is not all I think and believe nonsense?" And it was just thispeculiarity of Speranski's mind that particularly attracted PrinceAndrew.During the first period of their acquaintance Bolkonski felt apassionate admiration for him similar to that which he had once felt forBonaparte. The fact that Speranski was the son of a village priest, andthat stupid people might meanly despise him on account of his humbleorigin (as in fact many did), caused Prince Andrew to cherish hissentiment for him the more, and unconsciously to strengthen it.On that first evening Bolkonski spent with him, having mentioned theCommission for the Revision of the Code of Laws, Speranski told himsarcastically that the Commission had existed for a hundred and fiftyyears, had cost millions, and had done nothing except that Rosenkampfhad stuck labels on the corresponding paragraphs of the different codes."And that is all the state has for the millions it has spent," said he."We want to give the Senate new juridical powers, but we have no laws.That is why it is a sin for men like you, Prince, not to serve in thesetimes!"Prince Andrew said that for that work an education in jurisprudence wasneeded which he did not possess."But nobody possesses it, so what would you have? It is a vicious circlefrom which we must break a way out."A week later Prince Andrew was a member of the Committee on ArmyRegulations and--what he had not at all expected--was chairman of asection of the committee for the revision of the laws. At Speranski'srequest he took the first part of the Civil Code that was being drawn upand, with the aid of the Code Napoleon and the Institutes of Justinian,he worked at formulating the section on Personal Rights.CHAPTER VIINearly two years before this, in 1808, Pierre on returning to Petersburgafter visiting his estates had involuntarily found himself in a leadingposition among the Petersburg Freemasons. He arranged dining and funerallodge meetings, enrolled new members, and busied himself uniting variouslodges and acquiring authentic charters. He gave money for the erectionof temples and supplemented as far as he could the collection of alms,in regard to which the majority of members were stingy and irregular. Hesupported almost singlehanded a poorhouse the order had founded inPetersburg.His life meanwhile continued as before, with the same infatuations anddissipations. He liked to dine and drink well, and though he consideredit immoral and humiliating could not resist the temptations of thebachelor circles in which he moved.Amid the turmoil of his activities and distractions, however, Pierre atthe end of a year began to feel that the more firmly he tried to restupon it, the more masonic ground on which he stood gave way under him.At the same time he felt that the deeper the ground sank under him thecloser bound he involuntarily became to the order. When he had joinedthe Freemasons he had experienced the feeling of one who confidentlysteps onto the smooth surface of a bog. When he put his foot down itsank in. To make quite sure of the firmness of the ground, he put hisother foot down and sank deeper still, became stuck in it, andinvoluntarily waded knee-deep in the bog.Joseph Alexeevich was not in Petersburg--he had of late stood aside fromthe affairs of the Petersburg lodges, and lived almost entirely inMoscow. All the members of the lodges were men Pierre knew in ordinarylife, and it was difficult for him to regard them merely as Brothers inFreemasonry and not as Prince B. or Ivan Vasilevich D., whom he knew insociety mostly as weak and insignificant men. Under the masonic apronsand insignia he saw the uniforms and decorations at which they aimed inordinary life. Often after collecting alms, and reckoning up twenty tothirty rubles received for the most part in promises from a dozenmembers, of whom half were as well able to pay as himself, Pierreremembered the masonic vow in which each Brother promised to devote allhis belongings to his neighbor, and doubts on which he tried not todwell arose in his soul.He divided the Brothers he knew into four categories. In the first heput those who did not take an active part in the affairs of the lodgesor in human affairs, but were exclusively occupied with the mysticalscience of the order: with questions of the threefold designation ofGod, the three primordial elements--sulphur, mercury, and salt--or themeaning of the square and all the various figures of the temple ofSolomon. Pierre respected this class of Brothers to which the elder oneschiefly belonged, including, Pierre thought, Joseph Alexeevich himself,but he did not share their interests. His heart was not in the mysticalaspect of Freemasonry.In the second category Pierre reckoned himself and others like him,seeking and vacillating, who had not yet found in Freemasonry a straightand comprehensible path, but hoped to do so.In the third category he included those Brothers (the majority) who sawnothing in Freemasonry but the external forms and ceremonies, and prizedthe strict performance of these forms without troubling about theirpurport or significance. Such were Willarski and even the Grand Masterof the principal lodge.Finally, to the fourth category also a great many Brothers belonged,particularly those who had lately joined. These according to Pierre'sobservations were men who had no belief in anything, nor desire foranything, but joined the Freemasons merely to associate with the wealthyyoung Brothers who were influential through their connections or rank,and of whom there were very many in the lodge.Pierre began to feel dissatisfied with what he was doing. Freemasonry,at any rate as he saw it here, sometimes seemed to him based merely onexternals. He did not think of doubting Freemasonry itself, butsuspected that Russian Masonry had taken a wrong path and deviated fromits original principles. And so toward the end of the year he wentabroad to be initiated into the higher secrets of the order.In the summer of 1809 Pierre returned to Petersburg. Our Freemasons knewfrom correspondence with those abroad that Bezukhov had obtained theconfidence of many highly placed persons, had been initiated into manymysteries, had been raised to a higher grade, and was bringing back withhim much that might conduce to the advantage of the masonic cause inRussia. The Petersburg Freemasons all came to see him, tried toingratiate themselves with him, and it seemed to them all that he waspreparing something for them and concealing it.A solemn meeting of the lodge of the second degree was convened, atwhich Pierre promised to communicate to the Petersburg Brothers what hehad to deliver to them from the highest leaders of their order. Themeeting was a full one. After the usual ceremonies Pierre rose and beganhis address."Dear Brothers," he began, blushing and stammering, with a writtenspeech in his hand, "it is not sufficient to observe our mysteries inthe seclusion of our lodge--we must act--act! We are drowsing, but wemust act." Pierre raised his notebook and began to read."For the dissemination of pure truth and to secure the triumph ofvirtue," he read, "we must cleanse men from prejudice, diffuseprinciples in harmony with the spirit of the times, undertake theeducation of the young, unite ourselves in indissoluble bonds with thewisest men, boldly yet prudently overcome superstitions, infidelity, andfolly, and form of those devoted to us a body linked together by unityof purpose and possessed of authority and power."To attain this end we must secure a preponderance of virtue over viceand must endeavor to secure that the honest man may, even in this world,receive a lasting reward for his virtue. But in these great endeavors weare gravely hampered by the political institutions of today. What is tobe done in these circumstances? To favor revolutions, overthroweverything, repel force by force?... No! We are very far from that.Every violent reform deserves censure, for it quite fails to remedy evilwhile men remain what they are, and also because wisdom needs noviolence."The whole plan of our order should be based on the idea of preparingmen of firmness and virtue bound together by unity of conviction--aimingat the punishment of vice and folly, and patronizing talent and virtue:raising worthy men from the dust and attaching them to our Brotherhood.Only then will our order have the power unobtrusively to bind the handsof the protectors of disorder and to control them without their beingaware of it. In a word, we must found a form of government holdinguniversal sway, which should be diffused over the whole world withoutdestroying the bonds of citizenship, and beside which all othergovernments can continue in their customary course and do everythingexcept what impedes the great aim of our order, which is to obtain forvirtue the victory over vice. This aim was that of Christianity itself.It taught men to be wise and good and for their own benefit to followthe example and instruction of the best and wisest men."At that time, when everything was plunged in darkness, preaching alonewas of course sufficient. The novelty of Truth endowed her with specialstrength, but now we need much more powerful methods. It is nownecessary that man, governed by his senses, should find in virtue acharm palpable to those senses. It is impossible to eradicate thepassions; but we must strive to direct them to a noble aim, and it istherefore necessary that everyone should be able to satisfy his passionswithin the limits of virtue. Our order should provide means to that end."As soon as we have a certain number of worthy men in every state, eachof them again training two others and all being closely united,everything will be possible for our order, which has already in secretaccomplished much for the welfare of mankind."This speech not only made a strong impression, but created excitement inthe lodge. The majority of the Brothers, seeing in it dangerous designsof Illuminism, * met it with a coldness that surprised Pierre. The GrandMaster began answering him, and Pierre began developing his views withmore and more warmth. It was long since there had been so stormy ameeting. Parties were formed, some accusing Pierre of Illuminism, otherssupporting him. At that meeting he was struck for the first time by theendless variety of men's minds, which prevents a truth from everpresenting itself identically to two persons. Even those members whoseemed to be on his side understood him in their own way withlimitations and alterations he could not agree to, as what he alwayswanted most was to convey his thought to others just as he himselfunderstood it.* The Illuminati sought to substitute republican for monarchicalinstitutions.At the end of the meeting the Grand Master with irony and ill-willreproved Bezukhov for his vehemence and said it was not love of virtuealone, but also a love of strife that had moved him in the dispute.Pierre did not answer him and asked briefly whether his proposal wouldbe accepted. He was told that it would not, and without waiting for theusual formalities he left the lodge and went home.CHAPTER VIIIAgain Pierre was overtaken by the depression he so dreaded. For threedays after the delivery of his speech at the lodge he lay on a sofa athome receiving no one and going nowhere.It was just then that he received a letter from his wife, who imploredhim to see her, telling him how grieved she was about him and how shewished to devote her whole life to him.At the end of the letter she informed him that in a few days she wouldreturn to Petersburg from abroad.Following this letter one of the masonic Brothers whom Pierre respectedless than the others forced his way in to see him and, turning theconversation upon Pierre's matrimonial affairs, by way of fraternaladvice expressed the opinion that his severity to his wife was wrong andthat he was neglecting one of the first rules of Freemasonry by notforgiving the penitent.At the same time his mother-in-law, Prince Vasili's wife, sent to himimploring him to come if only for a few minutes to discuss a mostimportant matter. Pierre saw that there was a conspiracy against him andthat they wanted to reunite him with his wife, and in the mood he thenwas, this was not even unpleasant to him. Nothing mattered to him.Nothing in life seemed to him of much importance, and under theinfluence of the depression that possessed him he valued neither hisliberty nor his resolution to punish his wife."No one is right and no one is to blame; so she too is not to blame," hethought.If he did not at once give his consent to a reunion with his wife, itwas only because in his state of depression he did not feel able to takeany step. Had his wife come to him, he would not have turned her away.Compared to what preoccupied him, was it not a matter of indifferencewhether he lived with his wife or not?Without replying either to his wife or his mother-in-law, Pierre lateone night prepared for a journey and started for Moscow to see JosephAlexeevich. This is what he noted in his diary:Moscow, 17th NovemberI have just returned from my benefactor, and hasten to write down what Ihave experienced. Joseph Alexeevich is living poorly and has for threeyears been suffering from a painful disease of the bladder. No one hasever heard him utter a groan or a word of complaint. From morning tilllate at night, except when he eats his very plain food, he is working atscience. He received me graciously and made me sit down on the bed onwhich he lay. I made the sign of the Knights of the East and ofJerusalem, and he responded in the same manner, asking me with a mildsmile what I had learned and gained in the Prussian and Scottish lodges.I told him everything as best I could, and told him what I had proposedto our Petersburg lodge, of the bad reception I had encountered, and ofmy rupture with the Brothers. Joseph Alexeevich, having remained silentand thoughtful for a good while, told me his view of the matter, whichat once lit up for me my whole past and the future path I should follow.He surprised me by asking whether I remembered the threefold aim of theorder: (1) The preservation and study of the mystery. (2) Thepurification and reformation of oneself for its reception, and (3) Theimprovement of the human race by striving for such purification. Whichis the principal aim of these three? Certainly self-reformation andself-purification. Only to this aim can we always strive independentlyof circumstances. But at the same time just this aim demands thegreatest efforts of us; and so, led astray by pride, losing sight ofthis aim, we occupy ourselves either with the mystery which in ourimpurity we are unworthy to receive, or seek the reformation of thehuman race while ourselves setting an example of baseness andprofligacy. Illuminism is not a pure doctrine, just because it isattracted by social activity and puffed up by pride. On this groundJoseph Alexeevich condemned my speech and my whole activity, and in thedepth of my soul I agreed with him. Talking of my family affairs he saidto me, "the chief duty of a true Mason, as I have told you, lies inperfecting himself. We often think that by removing all the difficultiesof our life we shall more quickly reach our aim, but on the contrary, mydear sir, it is only in the midst of worldly cares that we can attainour three chief aims: (1) Self-knowledge--for man can only know himselfby comparison, (2) Self-perfecting, which can only be attained byconflict, and (3) The attainment of the chief virtue--love of death.Only the vicissitudes of life can show us its vanity and develop ourinnate love of death or of rebirth to a new life." These words are allthe more remarkable because, in spite of his great physical sufferings,Joseph Alexeevich is never weary of life though he loves death, forwhich--in spite of the purity and loftiness of his inner man--he doesnot yet feel himself sufficiently prepared. My benefactor then explainedto me fully the meaning of the Great Square of creation and pointed outto me that the numbers three and seven are the basis of everything. Headvised me not to avoid intercourse with the Petersburg Brothers, but totake up only second-grade posts in the lodge, to try, while divertingthe Brothers from pride, to turn them toward the true path self-knowledge and self-perfecting. Besides this he advised me for myselfpersonally above all to keep a watch over myself, and to that end hegave me a notebook, the one I am now writing in and in which I will infuture note down all my actions.Petersburg, 23rd NovemberI am again living with my wife. My mother-in-law came to me in tears andsaid that Helene was here and that she implored me to hear her; that shewas innocent and unhappy at my desertion, and much more. I knew that ifI once let myself see her I should not have strength to go on refusingwhat she wanted. In my perplexity I did not know whose aid and advice toseek. Had my benefactor been here he would have told me what to do. Iwent to my room and reread Joseph Alexeevich's letters and recalled myconversations with him, and deduced from it all that I ought not torefuse a supplicant, and ought to reach a helping hand to everyone--especially to one so closely bound to me--and that I must bear my cross.But if I forgive her for the sake of doing right, then let union withher have only a spiritual aim. That is what I decided, and what I wroteto Joseph Alexeevich. I told my wife that I begged her to forget thepast, to forgive me whatever wrong I may have done her, and that I hadnothing to forgive. It gave me joy to tell her this. She need not knowhow hard it was for me to see her again. I have settled on the upperfloor of this big house and am experiencing a happy feeling ofregeneration.CHAPTER IXAt that time, as always happens, the highest society that met at courtand at the grand balls was divided into several circles, each with itsown particular tone. The largest of these was the French circle of theNapoleonic alliance, the circle of Count Rumyantsev and Caulaincourt. Inthis group Helene, as soon as she had settled in Petersburg with herhusband, took a very prominent place. She was visited by the members ofthe French embassy and by many belonging to that circle and noted fortheir intellect and polished manners.Helene had been at Erfurt during the famous meeting of the Emperors andhad brought from there these connections with the Napoleonicnotabilities. At Erfurt her success had been brilliant. Napoleon himselfhad noticed her in the theater and said of her: "C'est un superbeanimal." * Her success as a beautiful and elegant woman did not surprisePierre, for she had become even handsomer than before. What did surprisehim was that during these last two years his wife had succeeded ingaining the reputation "d' une femme charmante, aussi spirituelle quebelle." *(2) The distinguished Prince de Ligne wrote her eight-pageletters. Bilibin saved up his epigrams to produce them in CountessBezukhova's presence. To be received in the Countess Bezukhova's salonwas regarded as a diploma of intellect. Young men read books beforeattending Helene's evenings, to have something to say in her salon, andsecretaries of the embassy, and even ambassadors, confided diplomaticsecrets to her, so that in a way Helene was a power. Pierre, who knewshe was very stupid, sometimes attended, with a strange feeling ofperplexity and fear, her evenings and dinner parties, where politics,poetry, and philosophy were discussed. At these parties his feelingswere like those of a conjuror who always expects his trick to be foundout at any moment. But whether because stupidity was just what wasneeded to run such a salon, or because those who were deceived foundpleasure in the deception, at any rate it remained unexposed and HeleneBezukhova's reputation as a lovely and clever woman became so firmlyestablished that she could say the emptiest and stupidest things andeverybody would go into raptures over every word of hers and look for aprofound meaning in it of which she herself had no conception.* "That's a superb animal."* (2) "Of a charming woman, as witty as she is lovely."Pierre was just the husband needed for a brilliant society woman. He wasthat absent-minded crank, a grand seigneur husband who was in no one'sway, and far from spoiling the high tone and general impression of thedrawing room, he served, by the contrast he presented to her, as anadvantageous background to his elegant and tactful wife. Pierre duringthe last two years, as a result of his continual absorption in abstractinterests and his sincere contempt for all else, had acquired in hiswife's circle, which did not interest him, that air of unconcern,indifference, and benevolence toward all, which cannot be acquiredartificially and therefore inspires involuntary respect. He entered hiswife's drawing room as one enters a theater, was acquainted witheverybody, equally pleased to see everyone, and equally indifferent tothem all. Sometimes he joined in a conversation which interested himand, regardless of whether any "gentlemen of the embassy" were presentor not, lispingly expressed his views, which were sometimes not at allin accord with the accepted tone of the moment. But the general opinionconcerning the queer husband of "the most distinguished woman inPetersburg" was so well established that no one took his freaksseriously.Among the many young men who frequented her house every day, BorisDrubetskoy, who had already achieved great success in the service, wasthe most intimate friend of the Bezukhov household since Helene's returnfrom Erfurt. Helene spoke of him as "mon page" and treated him like achild. Her smile for him was the same as for everybody, but sometimesthat smile made Pierre uncomfortable. Toward him Boris behaved with aparticularly dignified and sad deference. This shade of deference alsodisturbed Pierre. He had suffered so painfully three years before fromthe mortification to which his wife had subjected him that he nowprotected himself from the danger of its repetition, first by not beinga husband to his wife, and secondly by not allowing himself to suspect."No, now that she has become a bluestocking she has finally renouncedher former infatuations," he told himself. "There has never been aninstance of a bluestocking being carried away by affairs of the heart"--a statement which, though gathered from an unknown source, he believedimplicitly. Yet strange to say Boris' presence in his wife's drawingroom (and he was almost always there) had a physical effect upon Pierre;it constricted his limbs and destroyed the unconsciousness and freedomof his movements."What a strange antipathy," thought Pierre, "yet I used to like him verymuch."In the eyes of the world Pierre was a great gentleman, the rather blindand absurd husband of a distinguished wife, a clever crank who didnothing but harmed nobody and was a first-rate, good-natured fellow. Buta complex and difficult process of internal development was taking placeall this time in Pierre's soul, revealing much to him and causing himmany spiritual doubts and joys.CHAPTER XPierre went on with his diary, and this is what he wrote in it duringthat time:24th NovemberGot up at eight, read the Scriptures, then went to my duties. (By JosephAlexeevich's advice Pierre had entered the service of the state andserved on one of the committees.) Returned home for dinner and dinedalone--the countess had many visitors I do not like. I ate and drankmoderately and after dinner copied out some passages for the Brothers.In the evening I went down to the countess and told a funny story aboutB., and only remembered that I ought not to have done so when everybodylaughed loudly at it.I am going to bed with a happy and tranquil mind. Great God, help me towalk in Thy paths, (1) to conquer anger by calmness and deliberation,(2) to vanquish lust by self-restraint and repulsion, (3) to withdrawfrom worldliness, but not avoid (a) the service of the state, (b) familyduties, (c) relations with my friends, and the management of my affairs.27th NovemberI got up late. On waking I lay long in bed yielding to sloth. O God,help and strengthen me that I may walk in Thy ways! Read the Scriptures,but without proper feeling. Brother Urusov came and we talked aboutworldly vanities. He told me of the Emperor's new projects. I began tocriticize them, but remembered my rules and my benefactor's words--thata true Freemason should be a zealous worker for the state when his aidis required and a quiet onlooker when not called on to assist. My tongueis my enemy. Brothers G. V. and O. visited me and we had a preliminarytalk about the reception of a new Brother. They laid on me the duty ofRhetor. I feel myself weak and unworthy. Then our talk turned to theinterpretation of the seven pillars and steps of the Temple, the sevensciences, the seven virtues, the seven vices, and the seven gifts of theHoly Spirit. Brother O. was very eloquent. In the evening the admissiontook place. The new decoration of the Premises contributed much to themagnificence of the spectacle. It was Boris Drubetskoy who was admitted.I nominated him and was the Rhetor. A strange feeling agitated me allthe time I was alone with him in the dark chamber. I caught myselfharboring a feeling of hatred toward him which I vainly tried toovercome. That is why I should really like to save him from evil andlead him into the path of truth, but evil thoughts of him did not leaveme. It seemed to me that his object in entering the Brotherhood wasmerely to be intimate and in favor with members of our lodge. Apart fromthe fact that he had asked me several times whether N. and S. weremembers of our lodge (a question to which I could not reply) and thataccording to my observation he is incapable of feeling respect for ourholy order and is too preoccupied and satisfied with the outer man todesire spiritual improvement, I had no cause to doubt him, but he seemedto me insincere, and all the time I stood alone with him in the darktemple it seemed to me that he was smiling contemptuously at my words,and I wished really to stab his bare breast with the sword I held to it.I could not be eloquent, nor could I frankly mention my doubts to theBrothers and to the Grand Master. Great Architect of Nature, help me tofind the true path out of the labyrinth of lies!After this, three pages were left blank in the diary, and then thefollowing was written:I have had a long and instructive talk alone with Brother V., whoadvised me to hold fast by Brother A. Though I am unworthy, much wasrevealed to me. Adonai is the name of the creator of the world. Elohimis the name of the ruler of all. The third name is the name unutterablewhich means the All. Talks with Brother V. strengthen, refresh, andsupport me in the path of virtue. In his presence doubt has no place.The distinction between the poor teachings of mundane science and oursacred all-embracing teaching is clear to me. Human sciences dissecteverything to comprehend it, and kill everything to examine it. In theholy science of our order all is one, all is known in its entirety andlife. The Trinity--the three elements of matter--are sulphur, mercury,and salt. Sulphur is of an oily and fiery nature; in combination withsalt by its fiery nature it arouses a desire in the latter by means ofwhich it attracts mercury, seizes it, holds it, and in combinationproduces other bodies. Mercury is a fluid, volatile, spiritual essence.Christ, the Holy Spirit, Him!...3rd DecemberAwoke late, read the Scriptures but was apathetic. Afterwards went andpaced up and down the large hall. I wished to meditate, but instead myimagination pictured an occurrence of four years ago, when Dolokhov,meeting me in Moscow after our duel, said he hoped I was enjoyingperfect peace of mind in spite of my wife's absence. At the time I gavehim no answer. Now I recalled every detail of that meeting and in mymind gave him the most malevolent and bitter replies. I recollectedmyself and drove away that thought only when I found myself glowing withanger, but I did not sufficiently repent. Afterwards Boris Drubetskoycame and began relating various adventures. His coming vexed me from thefirst, and I said something disagreeable to him. He replied. I flared upand said much that was unpleasant and even rude to him. He becamesilent, and I recollected myself only when it was too late. My God, Icannot get on with him at all. The cause of this is my egotism. I setmyself above him and so become much worse than he, for he is lenient tomy rudeness while I on the contrary nourish contempt for him. O God,grant that in his presence I may rather see my own vileness, and behaveso that he too may benefit. After dinner I fell asleep and as I wasdrowsing off I clearly heard a voice saying in my left ear, "Thy day!"I dreamed that I was walking in the dark and was suddenly surrounded bydogs, but I went on undismayed. Suddenly a smallish dog seized my leftthigh with its teeth and would not let go. I began to throttle it withmy hands. Scarcely had I torn it off before another, a bigger one, beganbiting me. I lifted it up, but the higher I lifted it the bigger andheavier it grew. And suddenly Brother A. came and, taking my arm, led meto a building to enter which we had to pass along a narrow plank. Istepped on it, but it bent and gave way and I began to clamber up afence which I could scarcely reach with my hands. After much effort Idragged myself up, so that my leg hung down on one side and my body onthe other. I looked round and saw Brother A. standing on the fence andpointing me to a broad avenue and garden, and in the garden was a largeand beautiful building. I woke up. O Lord, great Architect of Nature,help me to tear from myself these dogs--my passions especially the last,which unites in itself the strength of all the former ones, and aid meto enter that temple of virtue to a vision of which I attained in mydream.7th DecemberI dreamed that Joseph Alexeevich was sitting in my house, and that I wasvery glad and wished to entertain him. It seemed as if I chatteredincessantly with other people and suddenly remembered that this couldnot please him, and I wished to come close to him and embrace him. Butas soon as I drew near I saw that his face had changed and grown young,and he was quietly telling me something about the teaching of our order,but so softly that I could not hear it. Then it seemed that we all leftthe room and something strange happened. We were sitting or lying on thefloor. He was telling me something, and I wished to show him mysensibility, and not listening to what he was saying I began picturingto myself the condition of my inner man and the grace of God sanctifyingme. And tears came into my eyes, and I was glad he noticed this. But helooked at me with vexation and jumped up, breaking off his remarks. Ifelt abashed and asked whether what he had been saying did not concernme; but he did not reply, gave me a kind look, and then we suddenlyfound ourselves in my bedroom where there is a double bed. He lay downon the edge of it and I burned with longing to caress him and lie downtoo. And he said, "Tell me frankly what is your chief temptation? Do youknow it? I think you know it already." Abashed by this question, Ireplied that sloth was my chief temptation. He shook his headincredulously; and even more abashed, I said that though I was livingwith my wife as he advised, I was not living with her as her husband. Tothis he replied that one should not deprive a wife of one's embraces andgave me to understand that that was my duty. But I replied that I shouldbe ashamed to do it, and suddenly everything vanished. And I awoke andfound in my mind the text from the Gospel: "The life was the light ofmen. And the light shineth in darkness; and the darkness comprehended itnot." Joseph Alexeevich's face had looked young and bright. That day Ireceived a letter from my benefactor in which he wrote about "conjugalduties."9th DecemberI had a dream from which I awoke with a throbbing heart. I saw that Iwas in Moscow in my house, in the big sitting room, and JosephAlexeevich came in from the drawing room. I seemed to know at once thatthe process of regeneration had already taken place in him, and I rushedto meet him. I embraced him and kissed his hands, and he said, "Hastthou noticed that my face is different?" I looked at him, still holdinghim in my arms, and saw that his face was young, but that he had no hairon his head and his features were quite changed. And I said, "I shouldhave known you had I met you by chance," and I thought to myself, "Am Itelling the truth?" And suddenly I saw him lying like a dead body; thenhe gradually recovered and went with me into my study carrying a largebook of sheets of drawing paper; I said, "I drew that," and he answeredby bowing his head. I opened the book, and on all the pages there wereexcellent drawings. And in my dream I knew that these drawingsrepresented the love adventures of the soul with its beloved. And on itspages I saw a beautiful representation of a maiden in transparentgarments and with a transparent body, flying up to the clouds. And Iseemed to know that this maiden was nothing else than a representationof the Song of Songs. And looking at those drawings I dreamed I feltthat I was doing wrong, but could not tear myself away from them. Lord,help me! My God, if Thy forsaking me is Thy doing, Thy will be done; butif I am myself the cause, teach me what I should do! I shall perish ofmy debauchery if Thou utterly desertest me!CHAPTER XIThe Rostovs' monetary affairs had not improved during the two years theyhad spent in the country.Though Nicholas Rostov had kept firmly to his resolution and was stillserving modestly in an obscure regiment, spending comparatively little,the way of life at Otradnoe--Mitenka's management of affairs, inparticular--was such that the debts inevitably increased every year. Theonly resource obviously presenting itself to the old count was to applyfor an official post, so he had come to Petersburg to look for one andalso, as he said, to let the lassies enjoy themselves for the last time.Soon after their arrival in Petersburg Berg proposed to Vera and wasaccepted.Though in Moscow the Rostovs belonged to the best society withoutthemselves giving it a thought, yet in Petersburg their circle ofacquaintances was a mixed and indefinite one. In Petersburg they wereprovincials, and the very people they had entertained in Moscow withoutinquiring to what set they belonged, here looked down on them.The Rostovs lived in the same hospitable way in Petersburg as in Moscow,and the most diverse people met at their suppers. Country neighbors fromOtradnoe, impoverished old squires and their daughters, Peronskaya amaid of honor, Pierre Bezukhov, and the son of their district postmasterwho had obtained a post in Petersburg. Among the men who very soonbecame frequent visitors at the Rostovs' house in Petersburg were Boris,Pierre whom the count had met in the street and dragged home with him,and Berg who spent whole days at the Rostovs' and paid the eldestdaughter, Countess Vera, the attentions a young man pays when he intendsto propose.Not in vain had Berg shown everybody his right hand wounded atAusterlitz and held a perfectly unnecessary sword in his left. Henarrated that episode so persistently and with so important an air thateveryone believed in the merit and usefulness of his deed, and he hadobtained two decorations for Austerlitz.In the Finnish war he also managed to distinguish himself. He had pickedup the scrap of a grenade that had killed an aide-de-camp standing nearthe commander-in-chief and had taken it to his commander. Just as he haddone after Austerlitz, he related this occurrence at such length and soinsistently that everyone again believed it had been necessary to dothis, and he received two decorations for the Finnish war also. In 1809he was a captain in the Guards, wore medals, and held some speciallucrative posts in Petersburg.Though some skeptics smiled when told of Berg's merits, it could not bedenied that he was a painstaking and brave officer, on excellent termswith his superiors, and a moral young man with a brilliant career beforehim and an assured position in society.Four years before, meeting a German comrade in the stalls of a Moscowtheater, Berg had pointed out Vera Rostova to him and had said inGerman, "das soll mein Weib werden," * and from that moment had made uphis mind to marry her. Now in Petersburg, having considered the Rostovs'position and his own, he decided that the time had come to propose.* "That girl shall be my wife."Berg's proposal was at first received with a perplexity that was notflattering to him. At first it seemed strange that the son of an obscureLivonian gentleman should propose marriage to a Countess Rostova; butBerg's chief characteristic was such a naive and good natured egotismthat the Rostovs involuntarily came to think it would be a good thing,since he himself was so firmly convinced that it was good, indeedexcellent. Moreover, the Rostovs' affairs were seriously embarrassed, asthe suitor could not but know; and above all, Vera was twenty-four, hadbeen taken out everywhere, and though she was certainly good-looking andsensible, no one up to now had proposed to her. So they gave theirconsent."You see," said Berg to his comrade, whom he called "friend" onlybecause he knew that everyone has friends, "you see, I have consideredit all, and should not marry if I had not thought it all out or if itwere in any way unsuitable. But on the contrary, my papa and mamma arenow provided for--I have arranged that rent for them in the BalticProvinces--and I can live in Petersburg on my pay, and with her fortuneand my good management we can get along nicely. I am not marrying formoney--I consider that dishonorable--but a wife should bring her shareand a husband his. I have my position in the service, she hasconnections and some means. In our times that is worth something, isn'tit? But above all, she is a handsome, estimable girl, and she lovesme..."Berg blushed and smiled."And I love her, because her character is sensible and very good. Nowthe other sister, though they are the same family, is quite different--an unpleasant character and has not the same intelligence. She is so...you know?... Unpleasant... But my fiancee!... Well, you will be coming,"he was going to say, "to dine," but changed his mind and said "to taketea with us," and quickly doubling up his tongue he blew a small roundring of tobacco smoke, perfectly embodying his dream of happiness.After the first feeling of perplexity aroused in the parents by Berg'sproposal, the holiday tone of joyousness usual at such times tookpossession of the family, but the rejoicing was external and insincere.In the family's feeling toward this wedding a certain awkwardness andconstraint was evident, as if they were ashamed of not having loved Verasufficiently and of being so ready to get her off their hands. The oldcount felt this most. He would probably have been unable to state thecause of his embarrassment, but it resulted from the state of hisaffairs. He did not know at all how much he had, what his debts amountedto, or what dowry he could give Vera. When his daughters were born hehad assigned to each of them, for her dowry, an estate with threehundred serfs; but one of these estates had already been sold, and theother was mortgaged and the interest so much in arrears that it wouldhave to be sold, so that it was impossible to give it to Vera. Nor hadhe any money.Berg had already been engaged a month, and only a week remained beforethe wedding, but the count had not yet decided in his own mind thequestion of the dowry, nor spoken to his wife about it. At one time thecount thought of giving her the Ryazan estate or of selling a forest, atanother time of borrowing money on a note of hand. A few days before thewedding Berg entered the count's study early one morning and, with apleasant smile, respectfully asked his future father-in-law to let himknow what Vera's dowry would be. The count was so disconcerted by thislong-foreseen inquiry that without consideration he gave the first replythat came into his head. "I like your being businesslike about it.... Ilike it. You shall be satisfied...."And patting Berg on the shoulder he got up, wishing to end theconversation. But Berg, smiling pleasantly, explained that if he did notknow for certain how much Vera would have and did not receive at leastpart of the dowry in advance, he would have to break matters off."Because, consider, Count--if I allowed myself to marry now withouthaving definite means to maintain my wife, I should be acting badly...."The conversation ended by the count, who wished to be generous and toavoid further importunity, saying that he would give a note of hand foreighty thousand rubles. Berg smiled meekly, kissed the count on theshoulder, and said that he was very grateful, but that it was impossiblefor him to arrange his new life without receiving thirty thousand inready money. "Or at least twenty thousand, Count," he added, "and then anote of hand for only sixty thousand.""Yes, yes, all right!" said the count hurriedly. "Only excuse me, mydear fellow, I'll give you twenty thousand and a note of hand for eightythousand as well. Yes, yes! Kiss me."CHAPTER XIINatasha was sixteen and it was the year 1809, the very year to which shehad counted on her fingers with Boris after they had kissed four yearsago. Since then she had not seen him. Before Sonya and her mother, ifBoris happened to be mentioned, she spoke quite freely of that episodeas of some childish, long-forgotten matter that was not worthmentioning. But in the secret depths of her soul the question whetherher engagement to Boris was a jest or an important, binding promisetormented her.Since Boris left Moscow in 1805 to join the army he had not seen theRostovs. He had been in Moscow several times, and had passed nearOtradnoe, but had never been to see them.Sometimes it occurred to Natasha that he did not wish to see her, andthis conjecture was confirmed by the sad tone in which her elders spokeof him."Nowadays old friends are not remembered," the countess would say whenBoris was mentioned.Anna Mikhaylovna also had of late visited them less frequently, seemedto hold herself with particular dignity, and always spoke rapturouslyand gratefully of the merits of her son and the brilliant career onwhich he had entered. When the Rostovs came to Petersburg Boris calledon them.He drove to their house in some agitation. The memory of Natasha was hismost poetic recollection. But he went with the firm intention of lettingher and her parents feel that the childish relations between himself andNatasha could not be binding either on her or on him. He had a brilliantposition in society thanks to his intimacy with Countess Bezukhova, abrilliant position in the service thanks to the patronage of animportant personage whose complete confidence he enjoyed, and he wasbeginning to make plans for marrying one of the richest heiresses inPetersburg, plans which might very easily be realized. When he enteredthe Rostovs' drawing room Natasha was in her own room. When she heard ofhis arrival she almost ran into the drawing room, flushed and beamingwith a more than cordial smile.Boris remembered Natasha in a short dress, with dark eyes shining fromunder her curls and boisterous, childish laughter, as he had known herfour years before; and so he was taken aback when quite a differentNatasha entered, and his face expressed rapturous astonishment. Thisexpression on his face pleased Natasha."Well, do you recognize your little madcap playmate?" asked thecountess.Boris kissed Natasha's hand and said that he was astonished at thechange in her."How handsome you have grown!""I should think so!" replied Natasha's laughing eyes."And is Papa older?" she asked.Natasha sat down and, without joining in Boris' conversation with thecountess, silently and minutely studied her childhood's suitor. He feltthe weight of that resolute and affectionate scrutiny and glanced at heroccasionally.Boris' uniform, spurs, tie, and the way his hair was brushed were allcomme il faut and in the latest fashion. This Natasha noticed at once.He sat rather sideways in the armchair next to the countess, arrangingwith his right hand the cleanest of gloves that fitted his left handlike a skin, and he spoke with a particularly refined compression of hislips about the amusements of the highest Petersburg society, recallingwith mild irony old times in Moscow and Moscow acquaintances. It was notaccidentally, Natasha felt, that he alluded, when speaking of thehighest aristocracy, to an ambassador's ball he had attended, and toinvitations he had received from N.N. and S.S.All this time Natasha sat silent, glancing up at him from under herbrows. This gaze disturbed and confused Boris more and more. He lookedround more frequently toward her, and broke off in what he was saying.He did not stay more than ten minutes, then rose and took his leave. Thesame inquisitive, challenging, and rather mocking eyes still looked athim. After his first visit Boris said to himself that Natasha attractedhim just as much as ever, but that he must not yield to that feeling,because to marry her, a girl almost without fortune, would mean ruin tohis career, while to renew their former relations without intending tomarry her would be dishonorable. Boris made up his mind to avoid meetingNatasha, but despite that resolution he called again a few days laterand began calling often and spending whole days at the Rostovs'. Itseemed to him that he ought to have an explanation with Natasha and tellher that the old times must be forgotten, that in spite of everything...she could not be his wife, that he had no means, and they would neverlet her marry him. But he failed to do so and felt awkward aboutentering on such an explanation. From day to day he became more and moreentangled. It seemed to her mother and Sonya that Natasha was in lovewith Boris as of old. She sang him his favorite songs, showed him heralbum, making him write in it, did not allow him to allude to the past,letting it be understood how delightful was the present; and every dayhe went away in a fog, without having said what he meant to, and notknowing what he was doing or why he came, or how it would all end. Heleft off visiting Helene and received reproachful notes from her everyday, and yet he continued to spend whole days with the Rostovs.CHAPTER XIIIOne night when the old countess, in nightcap and dressing jacket,without her false curls, and with her poor little knob of hair showingunder her white cotton cap, knelt sighing and groaning on a rug andbowing to the ground in prayer, her door creaked and Natasha, also in adressing jacket with slippers on her bare feet and her hair incurlpapers, ran in. The countess--her prayerful mood dispelled--lookedround and frowned. She was finishing her last prayer: "Can it be thatthis couch will be my grave?" Natasha, flushed and eager, seeing hermother in prayer, suddenly checked her rush, half sat down, andunconsciously put out her tongue as if chiding herself. Seeing that hermother was still praying she ran on tiptoe to the bed and, rapidlyslipping one little foot against the other, pushed off her slippers andjumped onto the bed the countess had feared might become her grave. Thiscouch was high, with a feather bed and five pillows each smaller thanthe one below. Natasha jumped on it, sank into the feather bed, rolledover to the wall, and began snuggling up the bedclothes as she settleddown, raising her knees to her chin, kicking out and laughing almostinaudibly, now covering herself up head and all, and now peeping at hermother. The countess finished her prayers and came to the bed with astern face, but seeing, that Natasha's head was covered, she smiled inher kind, weak way."Now then, now then!" said she."Mamma, can we have a talk? Yes?" said Natasha. "Now, just one on yourthroat and another... that'll do!" And seizing her mother round theneck, she kissed her on the throat. In her behavior to her motherNatasha seemed rough, but she was so sensitive and tactful that howevershe clasped her mother she always managed to do it without hurting heror making her feel uncomfortable or displeased."Well, what is it tonight?" said the mother, having arranged her pillowsand waited until Natasha, after turning over a couple of times, hadsettled down beside her under the quilt, spread out her arms, andassumed a serious expression.These visits of Natasha's at night before the count returned from hisclub were one of the greatest pleasures of both mother, and daughter."What is it tonight?--But I have to tell you..."Natasha put her hand on her mother's mouth."About Boris... I know," she said seriously; "that's what I have comeabout. Don't say it--I know. No, do tell me!" and she removed her hand."Tell me, Mamma! He's nice?""Natasha, you are sixteen. At your age I was married. You say Boris isnice. He is very nice, and I love him like a son. But what then?... Whatare you thinking about? You have quite turned his head, I can seethat...."As she said this the countess looked round at her daughter. Natasha waslying looking steadily straight before her at one of the mahoganysphinxes carved on the corners of the bedstead, so that the countessonly saw her daughter's face in profile. That face struck her by itspeculiarly serious and concentrated expression.Natasha was listening and considering."Well, what then?" said she."You have quite turned his head, and why? What do you want of him? Youknow you can't marry him.""Why not?" said Natasha, without changing her position."Because he is young, because he is poor, because he is a relation...and because you yourself don't love him.""How do you know?""I know. It is not right, darling!""But if I want to..." said Natasha."Leave off talking nonsense," said the countess."But if I want to...""Natasha, I am in earnest..."Natasha did not let her finish. She drew the countess' large hand toher, kissed it on the back and then on the palm, then again turned itover and began kissing first one knuckle, then the space between theknuckles, then the next knuckle, whispering, "January, February, March,April, May. Speak, Mamma, why don't you say anything? Speak!" said she,turning to her mother, who was tenderly gazing at her daughter and inthat contemplation seemed to have forgotten all she had wished to say."It won't do, my love! Not everyone will understand this friendshipdating from your childish days, and to see him so intimate with you mayinjure you in the eyes of other young men who visit us, and above all ittorments him for nothing. He may already have found a suitable andwealthy match, and now he's half crazy.""Crazy?" repeated Natasha."I'll tell you some things about myself. I had a cousin...""I know! Cyril Matveich... but he is old.""He was not always old. But this is what I'll do, Natasha, I'll have atalk with Boris. He need not come so often....""Why not, if he likes to?""Because I know it will end in nothing....""How can you know? No, Mamma, don't speak to him! What nonsense!" saidNatasha in the tone of one being deprived of her property. "Well, Iwon't marry, but let him come if he enjoys it and I enjoy it." Natashasmiled and looked at her mother. "Not to marry, but just so," she added."How so, my pet?""Just so. There's no need for me to marry him. But... just so.""Just so, just so," repeated the countess, and shaking all over, shewent off into a good humored, unexpected, elderly laugh."Don't laugh, stop!" cried Natasha. "You're shaking the whole bed!You're awfully like me, just such another giggler.... Wait..." and sheseized the countess' hands and kissed a knuckle of the little finger,saying, "June," and continued, kissing, "July, August," on the otherhand. "But, Mamma, is he very much in love? What do you think? Wasanybody ever so much in love with you? And he's very nice, very, verynice. Only not quite my taste--he is so narrow, like the dining-roomclock.... Don't you understand? Narrow, you know--gray, light gray...""What rubbish you're talking!" said the countess.Natasha continued: "Don't you really understand? Nicholas wouldunderstand.... Bezukhov, now, is blue, dark-blue and red, and he issquare.""You flirt with him too," said the countess, laughing."No, he is a Freemason, I have found out. He is fine, dark-blue andred.... How can I explain it to you?""Little countess!" the count's voice called from behind the door."You're not asleep?" Natasha jumped up, snatched up her slippers, andran barefoot to her own room.It was a long time before she could sleep. She kept thinking that no onecould understand all that she understood and all there was in her."Sonya?" she thought, glancing at that curled-up, sleeping little kittenwith her enormous plait of hair. "No, how could she? She's virtuous. Shefell in love with Nicholas and does not wish to know anything more. EvenMamma does not understand. It is wonderful how clever I am and how...charming she is," she went on, speaking of herself in the third person,and imagining it was some very wise man--the wisest and best of men--whowas saying it of her. "There is everything, everything in her,"continued this man. "She is unusually intelligent, charming... and thenshe is pretty, uncommonly pretty, and agile--she swims and ridessplendidly... and her voice! One can really say it's a wonderful voice!"She hummed a scrap from her favorite opera by Cherubini, threw herselfon her bed, laughed at the pleasant thought that she would immediatelyfall asleep, called Dunyasha the maid to put out the candle, and beforeDunyasha had left the room had already passed into yet another happierworld of dreams, where everything was as light and beautiful as inreality, and even more so because it was different.Next day the countess called Boris aside and had a talk with him, afterwhich he ceased coming to the Rostovs'.CHAPTER XIVOn the thirty-first of December, New Year's Eve, 1809 - 10 an oldgrandee of Catherine's day was giving a ball and midnight supper. Thediplomatic corps and the Emperor himself were to be present.The grandee's well-known mansion on the English Quay glittered withinnumerable lights. Police were stationed at the brightly lit entrancewhich was carpeted with red baize, and not only gendarmes but dozens ofpolice officers and even the police master himself stood at the porch.Carriages kept driving away and fresh ones arriving, with red-liveriedfootmen and footmen in plumed hats. From the carriages emerged menwearing uniforms, stars, and ribbons, while ladies in satin and erminecautiously descended the carriage steps which were let down for themwith a clatter, and then walked hurriedly and noiselessly over the baizeat the entrance.Almost every time a new carriage drove up a whisper ran through thecrowd and caps were doffed."The Emperor?... No, a minister.... prince... ambassador. Don't you seethe plumes?..." was whispered among the crowd.One person, better dressed than the rest, seemed to know everyone andmentioned by name the greatest dignitaries of the day.A third of the visitors had already arrived, but the Rostovs, who wereto be present, were still hurrying to get dressed.There had been many discussions and preparations for this ball in theRostov family, many fears that the invitation would not arrive, that thedresses would not be ready, or that something would not be arranged asit should be.Marya Ignatevna Peronskaya, a thin and shallow maid of honor at thecourt of the Dowager Empress, who was a friend and relation of thecountess and piloted the provincial Rostovs in Petersburg high society,was to accompany them to the ball.They were to call for her at her house in the Taurida Gardens at teno'clock, but it was already five minutes to ten, and the girls were notyet dressed.Natasha was going to her first grand ball. She had got up at eight thatmorning and had been in a fever of excitement and activity all day. Allher powers since morning had been concentrated on ensuring that theyall--she herself, Mamma, and Sonya--should be as well dressed aspossible. Sonya and her mother put themselves entirely in her hands. Thecountess was to wear a claret-colored velvet dress, and the two girlswhite gauze over pink silk slips, with roses on their bodices and theirhair dressed a la grecque.Everything essential had already been done; feet, hands, necks, and earswashed, perfumed, and powdered, as befits a ball; the openwork silkstockings and white satin shoes with ribbons were already on; thehairdressing was almost done. Sonya was finishing dressing and so wasthe countess, but Natasha, who had bustled about helping them all, wasbehindhand. She was still sitting before a looking-glass with a dressingjacket thrown over her slender shoulders. Sonya stood ready dressed inthe middle of the room and, pressing the head of a pin till it hurt herdainty finger, was fixing on a last ribbon that squeaked as the pin wentthrough it."That's not the way, that's not the way, Sonya!" cried Natasha turningher head and clutching with both hands at her hair which the maid whowas dressing it had not time to release. "That bow is not right. Comehere!"Sonya sat down and Natasha pinned the ribbon on differently."Allow me, Miss! I can't do it like that," said the maid who was holdingNatasha's hair."Oh, dear! Well then, wait. That's right, Sonya.""Aren't you ready? It is nearly ten," came the countess' voice."Directly! Directly! And you, Mamma?""I have only my cap to pin on.""Don't do it without me!" called Natasha. "You won't do it right.""But it's already ten."They had decided to be at the ball by half past ten, and Natasha hadstill to get dressed and they had to call at the Taurida Gardens.When her hair was done, Natasha, in her short petticoat from under whichher dancing shoes showed, and in her mother's dressing jacket, ran up toSonya, scrutinized her, and then ran to her mother. Turning her mother'shead this way and that, she fastened on the cap and, hurriedly kissingher gray hair, ran back to the maids who were turning up the hem of herskirt.The cause of the delay was Natasha's skirt, which was too long. Twomaids were turning up the hem and hurriedly biting off the ends ofthread. A third with pins in her mouth was running about between thecountess and Sonya, and a fourth held the whole of the gossamer garmentup high on one uplifted hand."Mavra, quicker, darling!""Give me my thimble, Miss, from there...""Whenever will you be ready?" asked the count coming to the door. "Hereis some scent. Peronskaya must be tired of waiting.""It's ready, Miss," said the maid, holding up the shortened gauze dresswith two fingers, and blowing and shaking something off it, as if bythis to express a consciousness of the airiness and purity of what sheheld.Natasha began putting on the dress."In a minute! In a minute! Don't come in, Papa!" she cried to her fatheras he opened the door--speaking from under the filmy skirt which stillcovered her whole face.Sonya slammed the door to. A minute later they let the count in. He waswearing a blue swallow-tail coat, shoes and stockings, and was perfumedand his hair pomaded."Oh, Papa! how nice you look! Charming!" cried Natasha, as she stood inthe middle of the room smoothing out the folds of the gauze."If you please, Miss! allow me," said the maid, who on her knees waspulling the skirt straight and shifting the pins from one side of hermouth to the other with her tongue."Say what you like," exclaimed Sonya, in a despairing voice as shelooked at Natasha, "say what you like, it's still too long."Natasha stepped back to look at herself in the pier glass. The dress wastoo long."Really, madam, it is not at all too long," said Mavra, crawling on herknees after her young lady."Well, if it's too long we'll take it up... we'll tack it up in oneminute," said the resolute Dunyasha taking a needle that was stuck onthe front of her little shawl and, still kneeling on the floor, set towork once more.At that moment, with soft steps, the countess came in shyly, in her capand velvet gown."Oo-oo, my beauty!" exclaimed the count, "she looks better than any ofyou!"He would have embraced her but, blushing, she stepped aside fearing tobe rumpled."Mamma, your cap, more to this side," said Natasha. "I'll arrange it,"and she rushed forward so that the maids who were tacking up her skirtcould not move fast enough and a piece of gauze was torn off."Oh goodness! What has happened? Really it was not my fault!""Never mind, I'll run it up, it won't show," said Dunyasha."What a beauty--a very queen!" said the nurse as she came to the door."And Sonya! They are lovely!"At a quarter past ten they at last got into their carriages and started.But they had still to call at the Taurida Gardens.Peronskaya was quite ready. In spite of her age and plainness she hadgone through the same process as the Rostovs, but with less flurry--forto her it was a matter of routine. Her ugly old body was washed,perfumed, and powdered in just the same way. She had washed behind herears just as carefully, and when she entered her drawing room in heryellow dress, wearing her badge as maid of honor, her old lady's maidwas as full of rapturous admiration as the Rostovs' servants had been.She praised the Rostovs' toilets. They praised her taste and toilet, andat eleven o'clock, careful of their coiffures and dresses, they settledthemselves in their carriages and drove off.CHAPTER XVNatasha had not had a moment free since early morning and had not oncehad time to think of what lay before her.In the damp chill air and crowded closeness of the swaying carriage, shefor the first time vividly imagined what was in store for her there atthe ball, in those brightly lighted rooms--with music, flowers, dances,the Emperor, and all the brilliant young people of Petersburg. Theprospect was so splendid that she hardly believed it would come true, soout of keeping was it with the chill darkness and closeness of thecarriage. She understood all that awaited her only when, after steppingover the red baize at the entrance, she entered the hall, took off herfur cloak, and, beside Sonya and in front of her mother, mounted thebrightly illuminated stairs between the flowers. Only then did sheremember how she must behave at a ball, and tried to assume the majesticair she considered indispensable for a girl on such an occasion. But,fortunately for her, she felt her eyes growing misty, she saw nothingclearly, her pulse beat a hundred to the minute, and the blood throbbedat her heart. She could not assume that pose, which would have made herridiculous, and she moved on almost fainting from excitement and tryingwith all her might to conceal it. And this was the very attitude thatbecame her best. Before and behind them other visitors were entering,also talking in low tones and wearing ball dresses. The mirrors on thelanding reflected ladies in white, pale-blue, and pink dresses, withdiamonds and pearls on their bare necks and arms.Natasha looked in the mirrors and could not distinguish her reflectionfrom the others. All was blended into one brilliant procession. Onentering the ballroom the regular hum of voices, footsteps, andgreetings deafened Natasha, and the light and glitter dazzled her stillmore. The host and hostess, who had already been standing at the doorfor half an hour repeating the same words to the various arrivals,"Charme de vous voir," * greeted the Rostovs and Peronskaya in the samemanner.* "Delighted to see you."The two girls in their white dresses, each with a rose in her blackhair, both curtsied in the same way, but the hostess' eye involuntarilyrested longer on the slim Natasha. She looked at her and gave her alonea special smile in addition to her usual smile as hostess. Looking ather she may have recalled the golden, irrecoverable days of her owngirlhood and her own first ball. The host also followed Natasha with hiseyes and asked the count which was his daughter."Charming!" said he, kissing the tips of his fingers.In the ballroom guests stood crowding at the entrance doors awaiting theEmperor. The countess took up a position in one of the front rows ofthat crowd. Natasha heard and felt that several people were asking abouther and looking at her. She realized that those noticing her liked her,and this observation helped to calm her."There are some like ourselves and some worse," she thought.Peronskaya was pointing out to the countess the most important people atthe ball."That is the Dutch ambassador, do you see? That gray-haired man," shesaid, indicating an old man with a profusion of silver-gray curly hair,who was surrounded by ladies laughing at something he said."Ah, here she is, the Queen of Petersburg, Countess Bezukhova," saidPeronskaya, indicating Helene who had just entered. "How lovely! She isquite equal to Marya Antonovna. See how the men, young and old, paycourt to her. Beautiful and clever... they say Prince--is quite madabout her. But see, those two, though not good-looking, are even morerun after."She pointed to a lady who was crossing the room followed by a very plaindaughter."She is a splendid match, a millionairess," said Peronskaya. "And look,here come her suitors.""That is Bezukhova's brother, Anatole Kuragin," she said, indicating ahandsome officer of the Horse Guards who passed by them with head erect,looking at something over the heads of the ladies. "He's handsome, isn'the? I hear they will marry him to that rich girl. But your cousin,Drubetskoy, is also very attentive to her. They say she has millions. Ohyes, that's the French ambassador himself!" she replied to the countess'inquiry about Caulaincourt. "Looks as if he were a king! All the same,the French are charming, very charming. No one more charming in society.Ah, here she is! Yes, she is still the most beautiful of them all, ourMarya Antonovna! And how simply she is dressed! Lovely! And that stoutone in spectacles is the universal Freemason," she went on, indicatingPierre. "Put him beside his wife and he looks a regular buffoon!"Pierre, swaying his stout body, advanced, making way through the crowdand nodding to right and left as casually and good-naturedly as if hewere passing through a crowd at a fair. He pushed through, evidentlylooking for someone.Natasha looked joyfully at the familiar face of Pierre, "the buffoon,"as Peronskaya had called him, and knew he was looking for them, and forher in particular. He had promised to be at the ball and introducepartners to her.But before he reached them Pierre stopped beside a very handsome, darkman of middle height, and in a white uniform, who stood by a windowtalking to a tall man wearing stars and a ribbon. Natasha at oncerecognized the shorter and younger man in the white uniform: it wasBolkonski, who seemed to her to have grown much younger, happier, andbetter-looking."There's someone else we know--Bolkonski, do you see, Mamma?" saidNatasha, pointing out Prince Andrew. "You remember, he stayed a nightwith us at Otradnoe.""Oh, you know him?" said Peronskaya. "I can't bear him. Il fait apresent la pluie et le beau temps. * He's too proud for anything. Takesafter his father. And he's hand in glove with Speranski, writing someproject or other. Just look how he treats the ladies! There's onetalking to him and he has turned away," she said, pointing at him. "I'dgive it to him if he treated me as he does those ladies."* "He is all the rage just now."CHAPTER XVISuddenly everybody stirred, began talking, and pressed forward and thenback, and between the two rows, which separated, the Emperor entered tothe sounds of music that had immediately struck up. Behind him walkedhis host and hostess. He walked in rapidly, bowing to right and left asif anxious to get the first moments of the reception over. The bandplayed the polonaise in vogue at that time on account of the words thathad been set to it, beginning: "Alexander, Elisaveta, all our hearts youravish quite..." The Emperor passed on to the drawing room, the crowdmade a rush for the doors, and several persons with excited faceshurried there and back again. Then the crowd hastily retired from thedrawing-room door, at which the Emperor reappeared talking to thehostess. A young man, looking distraught, pounced down on the ladies,asking them to move aside. Some ladies, with faces betraying completeforgetfulness of all the rules of decorum, pushed forward to thedetriment of their toilets. The men began to choose partners and taketheir places for the polonaise.Everyone moved back, and the Emperor came smiling out of the drawingroom leading his hostess by the hand but not keeping time to the music.The host followed with Marya Antonovna Naryshkina; then cameambassadors, ministers, and various generals, whom Peronskaya diligentlynamed. More than half the ladies already had partners and were takingup, or preparing to take up, their positions for the polonaise. Natashafelt that she would be left with her mother and Sonya among a minorityof women who crowded near the wall, not having been invited to dance.She stood with her slender arms hanging down, her scarcely defined bosomrising and falling regularly, and with bated breath and glittering,frightened eyes gazed straight before her, evidently prepared for theheight of joy or misery. She was not concerned about the Emperor or anyof those great people whom Peronskaya was pointing out--she had but onethought: "Is it possible no one will ask me, that I shall not be amongthe first to dance? Is it possible that not one of all these men willnotice me? They do not even seem to see me, or if they do they look asif they were saying, 'Ah, she's not the one I'm after, so it's not worthlooking at her!' No, it's impossible," she thought. "They must know howI long to dance, how splendidly I dance, and how they would enjoydancing with me."The strains of the polonaise, which had continued for a considerabletime, had begun to sound like a sad reminiscence to Natasha's ears. Shewanted to cry. Peronskaya had left them. The count was at the other endof the room. She and the countess and Sonya were standing by themselvesas in the depths of a forest amid that crowd of strangers, with no oneinterested in them and not wanted by anyone. Prince Andrew with a ladypassed by, evidently not recognizing them. The handsome Anatole wassmilingly talking to a partner on his arm and looked at Natasha as onelooks at a wall. Boris passed them twice and each time turned away. Bergand his wife, who were not dancing, came up to them.This family gathering seemed humiliating to Natasha--as if there werenowhere else for the family to talk but here at the ball. She did notlisten to or look at Vera, who was telling her something about her owngreen dress.At last the Emperor stopped beside his last partner (he had danced withthree) and the music ceased. A worried aide-de-camp ran up to theRostovs requesting them to stand farther back, though as it was theywere already close to the wall, and from the gallery resounded thedistinct, precise, enticingly rhythmical strains of a waltz. The Emperorlooked smilingly down the room. A minute passed but no one had yet begundancing. An aide-de-camp, the Master of Ceremonies, went up to CountessBezukhova and asked her to dance. She smilingly raised her hand and laidit on his shoulder without looking at him. The aide-de-camp, an adept inhis art, grasping his partner firmly round her waist, with confidentdeliberation started smoothly, gliding first round the edge of thecircle, then at the corner of the room he caught Helene's left hand andturned her, the only sound audible, apart from the ever-quickeningmusic, being the rhythmic click of the spurs on his rapid, agile feet,while at every third beat his partner's velvet dress spread out andseemed to flash as she whirled round. Natasha gazed at them and wasready to cry because it was not she who was dancing that first turn ofthe waltz.Prince Andrew, in the white uniform of a cavalry colonel, wearingstockings and dancing shoes, stood looking animated and bright in thefront row of the circle not far from the Rostovs. Baron Firhoff wastalking to him about the first sitting of the Council of State to beheld next day. Prince Andrew, as one closely connected with Speranskiand participating in the work of the legislative commission, could givereliable information about that sitting, concerning which various rumorswere current. But not listening to what Firhoff was saying, he wasgazing now at the sovereign and now at the men intending to dance whohad not yet gathered courage to enter the circle.Prince Andrew was watching these men abashed by the Emperor's presence,and the women who were breathlessly longing to be asked to dance.Pierre came up to him and caught him by the arm."You always dance. I have a protegee, the young Rostova, here. Ask her,"he said."Where is she?" asked Bolkonski. "Excuse me!" he added, turning to thebaron, "we will finish this conversation elsewhere--at a ball one mustdance." He stepped forward in the direction Pierre indicated. Thedespairing, dejected expression of Natasha's face caught his eye. Herecognized her, guessed her feelings, saw that it was her debut,remembered her conversation at the window, and with an expression ofpleasure on his face approached Countess Rostova."Allow me to introduce you to my daughter," said the countess, withheightened color."I have the pleasure of being already acquainted, if the countessremembers me," said Prince Andrew with a low and courteous bow quitebelying Peronskaya's remarks about his rudeness, and approaching Natashahe held out his arm to grasp her waist before he had completed hisinvitation. He asked her to waltz. That tremulous expression onNatasha's face, prepared either for despair or rapture, suddenlybrightened into a happy, grateful, childlike smile."I have long been waiting for you," that frightened happy little girlseemed to say by the smile that replaced the threatened tears, as sheraised her hand to Prince Andrew's shoulder. They were the second coupleto enter the circle. Prince Andrew was one of the best dancers of hisday and Natasha danced exquisitely. Her little feet in their white satindancing shoes did their work swiftly, lightly, and independently ofherself, while her face beamed with ecstatic happiness. Her slender barearms and neck were not beautiful--compared to Helene's her shoulderslooked thin and her bosom undeveloped. But Helene seemed, as it were,hardened by a varnish left by the thousands of looks that had scannedher person, while Natasha was like a girl exposed for the first time,who would have felt very much ashamed had she not been assured that thiswas absolutely necessary.Prince Andrew liked dancing, and wishing to escape as quickly aspossible from the political and clever talk which everyone addressed tohim, wishing also to break up the circle of restraint he disliked,caused by the Emperor's presence, he danced, and had chosen Natashabecause Pierre pointed her out to him and because she was the firstpretty girl who caught his eye; but scarcely had he embraced thatslender supple figure and felt her stirring so close to him and smilingso near him than the wine of her charm rose to his head, and he felthimself revived and rejuvenated when after leaving her he stoodbreathing deeply and watching the other dancers.CHAPTER XVIIAfter Prince Andrew, Boris came up to ask Natasha for a dance, and thenthe aide-de-camp who had opened the ball, and several other young men,so that, flushed and happy, and passing on her superfluous partners toSonya, she did not cease dancing all the evening. She noticed and sawnothing of what occupied everyone else. Not only did she fail to noticethat the Emperor talked a long time with the French ambassador, and howparticularly gracious he was to a certain lady, or that Prince So-and-soand So-and-so did and said this and that, and that Helene had greatsuccess and was honored by the special attention of So-and-so, but shedid not even see the Emperor, and only noticed that he had gone becausethe ball became livelier after his departure. For one of the merrycotillions before supper Prince Andrew was again her partner. Hereminded her of their first encounter in the Otradnoe avenue, and howshe had been unable to sleep that moonlight night, and told her how hehad involuntarily overheard her. Natasha blushed at that recollectionand tried to excuse herself, as if there had been something to beashamed of in what Prince Andrew had overheard.Like all men who have grown up in society, Prince Andrew liked meetingsomeone there not of the conventional society stamp. And such wasNatasha, with her surprise, her delight, her shyness, and even hermistakes in speaking French. With her he behaved with special care andtenderness, sitting beside her and talking of the simplest and mostunimportant matters; he admired her shy grace. In the middle of thecotillion, having completed one of the figures, Natasha, still out ofbreath, was returning to her seat when another dancer chose her. She wastired and panting and evidently thought of declining, but immediatelyput her hand gaily on the man's shoulder, smiling at Prince Andrew."I'd be glad to sit beside you and rest: I'm tired; but you see how theykeep asking me, and I'm glad of it, I'm happy and I love everybody, andyou and I understand it all," and much, much more was said in her smile.When her partner left her Natasha ran across the room to choose twoladies for the figure."If she goes to her cousin first and then to another lady, she will bemy wife," said Prince Andrew to himself quite to his own surprise, as hewatched her. She did go first to her cousin."What rubbish sometimes enters one's head!" thought Prince Andrew, "butwhat is certain is that that girl is so charming, so original, that shewon't be dancing here a month before she will be married.... Such as sheare rare here," he thought, as Natasha, readjusting a rose that wasslipping on her bodice, settled herself beside him.When the cotillion was over the old count in his blue coat came up tothe dancers. He invited Prince Andrew to come and see them, and askedhis daughter whether she was enjoying herself. Natasha did not answer atonce but only looked up with a smile that said reproachfully: "How canyou ask such a question?""I have never enjoyed myself so much before!" she said, and PrinceAndrew noticed how her thin arms rose quickly as if to embrace herfather and instantly dropped again. Natasha was happier than she hadever been in her life. She was at that height of bliss when one becomescompletely kind and good and does not believe in the possibility ofevil, unhappiness, or sorrow.At that ball Pierre for the first time felt humiliated by the positionhis wife occupied in court circles. He was gloomy and absent-minded. Adeep furrow ran across his forehead, and standing by a window he staredover his spectacles seeing no one.On her way to supper Natasha passed him.Pierre's gloomy, unhappy look struck her. She stopped in front of him.She wished to help him, to bestow on him the superabundance of her ownhappiness."How delightful it is, Count!" said she. "Isn't it?"Pierre smiled absent-mindedly, evidently not grasping what she said."Yes, I am very glad," he said."How can people be dissatisfied with anything?" thought Natasha."Especially such a capital fellow as Bezukhov!" In Natasha's eyes allthe people at the ball alike were good, kind, and splendid people,loving one another; none of them capable of injuring another--and sothey ought all to be happy.CHAPTER XVIIINext day Prince Andrew thought of the ball, but his mind did not dwellon it long. "Yes, it was a very brilliant ball," and then... "Yes, thatlittle Rostova is very charming. There's something fresh, original, un-Petersburg-like about her that distinguishes her." That was all hethought about yesterday's ball, and after his morning tea he set towork.But either from fatigue or want of sleep he was ill-disposed for workand could get nothing done. He kept criticizing his own work, as heoften did, and was glad when he heard someone coming.The visitor was Bitski, who served on various committees, frequented allthe societies in Petersburg, and a passionate devotee of the new ideasand of Speranski, and a diligent Petersburg newsmonger--one of those menwho choose their opinions like their clothes according to the fashion,but who for that very reason appear to be the warmest partisans. Hardlyhad he got rid of his hat before he ran into Prince Andrew's room with apreoccupied air and at once began talking. He had just heard particularsof that morning's sitting of the Council of State opened by the Emperor,and he spoke of it enthusiastically. The Emperor's speech had beenextraordinary. It had been a speech such as only constitutional monarchsdeliver. "The Sovereign plainly said that the Council and Senate areestates of the realm, he said that the government must rest not onauthority but on secure bases. The Emperor said that the fiscal systemmust be reorganized and the accounts published," recounted Bitski,emphasizing certain words and opening his eyes significantly."Ah, yes! Today's events mark an epoch, the greatest epoch in ourhistory," he concluded.Prince Andrew listened to the account of the opening of the Council ofState, which he had so impatiently awaited and to which he had attachedsuch importance, and was surprised that this event, now that it hadtaken place, did not affect him, and even seemed quite insignificant. Helistened with quiet irony to Bitski's enthusiastic account of it. A verysimple thought occurred to him: "What does it matter to me or to Bitskiwhat the Emperor was pleased to say at the Council? Can all that make meany happier or better?"And this simple reflection suddenly destroyed all the interest PrinceAndrew had felt in the impending reforms. He was going to dine thatevening at Speranski's, "with only a few friends," as the host had saidwhen inviting him. The prospect of that dinner in the intimate homecircle of the man he so admired had greatly interested Prince Andrew,especially as he had not yet seen Speranski in his domesticsurroundings, but now he felt disinclined to go to it.At the appointed hour, however, he entered the modest house Speranskiowned in the Taurida Gardens. In the parqueted dining room this smallhouse, remarkable for its extreme cleanliness (suggesting that of amonastery), Prince Andrew, who was rather late, found the friendlygathering of Speranski's intimate acquaintances already assembled atfive o'clock. There were no ladies present except Speranski's littledaughter (long-faced like her father) and her governess. The otherguests were Gervais, Magnitski, and Stolypin. While still in theanteroom Prince Andrew heard loud voices and a ringing staccato laugh--alaugh such as one hears on the stage. Someone--it sounded likeSperanski--was distinctly ejaculating ha-ha-ha. Prince Andrew had neverbefore heard Speranski's famous laugh, and this ringing, high-pitchedlaughter from a statesman made a strange impression on him.He entered the dining room. The whole company were standing between twowindows at a small table laid with hors-d'oeuvres. Speranski, wearing agray swallow-tail coat with a star on the breast, and evidently stillthe same waistcoat and high white stock he had worn at the meeting ofthe Council of State, stood at the table with a beaming countenance. Hisguests surrounded him. Magnitski, addressing himself to Speranski, wasrelating an anecdote, and Speranski was laughing in advance at whatMagnitski was going to say. When Prince Andrew entered the roomMagnitski's words were again crowned by laughter. Stolypin gave a deepbass guffaw as he munched a piece of bread and cheese. Gervais laughedsoftly with a hissing chuckle, and Speranski in a high-pitched staccatomanner.Still laughing, Speranski held out his soft white hand to Prince Andrew."Very pleased to see you, Prince," he said. "One moment..." he went on,turning to Magnitski and interrupting his story. "We have agreed thatthis is a dinner for recreation, with not a word about business!" andturning again to the narrator he began to laugh afresh.Prince Andrew looked at the laughing Speranski with astonishment,regret, and disillusionment. It seemed to him that this was notSperanski but someone else. Everything that had formerly appearedmysterious and fascinating in Speranski suddenly became plain andunattractive.At dinner the conversation did not cease for a moment and seemed toconsist of the contents of a book of funny anecdotes. Before Magnitskihad finished his story someone else was anxious to relate somethingstill funnier. Most of the anecdotes, if not relating to the stateservice, related to people in the service. It seemed that in thiscompany the insignificance of those people was so definitely acceptedthat the only possible attitude toward them was one of good humoredridicule. Speranski related how at the Council that morning a deafdignitary, when asked his opinion, replied that he thought so too.Gervais gave a long account of an official revision, remarkable for thestupidity of everybody concerned. Stolypin, stuttering, broke into theconversation and began excitedly talking of the abuses that existedunder the former order of things--threatening to give a serious turn tothe conversation. Magnitski starting quizzing Stolypin about hisvehemence. Gervais intervened with a joke, and the talk reverted to itsformer lively tone.Evidently Speranski liked to rest after his labors and find amusement ina circle of friends, and his guests, understanding his wish, tried toenliven him and amuse themselves. But their gaiety seemed to PrinceAndrew mirthless and tiresome. Speranski's high-pitched voice struck himunpleasantly, and the incessant laughter grated on him like a falsenote. Prince Andrew did not laugh and feared that he would be a damperon the spirits of the company, but no one took any notice of his beingout of harmony with the general mood. They all seemed very gay.He tried several times to join in the conversation, but his remarks weretossed aside each time like a cork thrown out of the water, and he couldnot jest with them.There was nothing wrong or unseemly in what they said, it was witty andmight have been funny, but it lacked just that something which is thesalt of mirth, and they were not even aware that such a thing existed.After dinner Speranski's daughter and her governess rose. He patted thelittle girl with his white hand and kissed her. And that gesture, too,seemed unnatural to Prince Andrew.The men remained at table over their port--English fashion. In the midstof a conversation that was started about Napoleon's Spanish affairs,which they all agreed in approving, Prince Andrew began to express acontrary opinion. Speranski smiled and, with an evident wish to preventthe conversation from taking an unpleasant course, told a story that hadno connection with the previous conversation. For a few moments all weresilent.Having sat some time at table, Speranski corked a bottle of wine and,remarking, "Nowadays good wine rides in a carriage and pair," passed itto the servant and got up. All rose and continuing to talk loudly wentinto the drawing room. Two letters brought by a courier were handed toSperanski and he took them to his study. As soon as he had left the roomthe general merriment stopped and the guests began to converse sensiblyand quietly with one another."Now for the recitation!" said Speranski on returning from his study. "Awonderful talent!" he said to Prince Andrew, and Magnitski immediatelyassumed a pose and began reciting some humorous verses in French whichhe had composed about various well-known Petersburg people. He wasinterrupted several times by applause. When the verses were finishedPrince Andrew went up to Speranski and took his leave."Where are you off to so early?" asked Speranski."I promised to go to a reception."They said no more. Prince Andrew looked closely into those mirrorlike,impenetrable eyes, and felt that it had been ridiculous of him to haveexpected anything from Speranski and from any of his own activitiesconnected with him, or ever to have attributed importance to whatSperanski was doing. That precise, mirthless laughter rang in PrinceAndrew's ears long after he had left the house.When he reached home Prince Andrew began thinking of his life inPetersburg during those last four months as if it were something new. Herecalled his exertions and solicitations, and the history of his projectof army reform, which had been accepted for consideration and which theywere trying to pass over in silence simply because another, a very poorone, had already been prepared and submitted to the Emperor. He thoughtof the meetings of a committee of which Berg was a member. He rememberedhow carefully and at what length everything relating to form andprocedure was discussed at those meetings, and how sedulously andpromptly all that related to the gist of the business was evaded. Herecalled his labors on the Legal Code, and how painstakingly he hadtranslated the articles of the Roman and French codes into Russian, andhe felt ashamed of himself. Then he vividly pictured to himselfBogucharovo, his occupations in the country, his journey to Ryazan; heremembered the peasants and Dron the village elder, and mentallyapplying to them the Personal Rights he had divided into paragraphs, hefelt astonished that he could have spent so much time on such uselesswork.CHAPTER XIXNext day Prince Andrew called at a few houses he had not visited before,and among them at the Rostovs' with whom he had renewed acquaintance atthe ball. Apart from considerations of politeness which demanded thecall, he wanted to see that original, eager girl who had left such apleasant impression on his mind, in her own home.Natasha was one of the first to meet him. She was wearing a dark-bluehouse dress in which Prince Andrew thought her even prettier than in herball dress. She and all the Rostov family welcomed him as an old friend,simply and cordially. The whole family, whom he had formerly judgedseverely, now seemed to him to consist of excellent, simple, and kindlypeople. The old count's hospitality and good nature, which struck oneespecially in Petersburg as a pleasant surprise, were such that PrinceAndrew could not refuse to stay to dinner. "Yes," he thought, "they arecapital people, who of course have not the slightest idea what atreasure they possess in Natasha; but they are kindly folk and form thebest possible setting for this strikingly poetic, charming girl,overflowing with life!"In Natasha Prince Andrew was conscious of a strange world completelyalien to him and brimful of joys unknown to him, a different world, thatin the Otradnoe avenue and at the window that moonlight night hadalready begun to disconcert him. Now this world disconcerted him nolonger and was no longer alien to him, but he himself having entered itfound in it a new enjoyment.After dinner Natasha, at Prince Andrew's request, went to the clavichordand began singing. Prince Andrew stood by a window talking to the ladiesand listened to her. In the midst of a phrase he ceased speaking andsuddenly felt tears choking him, a thing he had thought impossible forhim. He looked at Natasha as she sang, and something new and joyfulstirred in his soul. He felt happy and at the same time sad. He hadabsolutely nothing to weep about yet he was ready to weep. What about?His former love? The little princess? His disillusionments?... His hopesfor the future?... Yes and no. The chief reason was a sudden, vividsense of the terrible contrast between something infinitely great andillimitable within him and that limited and material something that he,and even she, was. This contrast weighed on and yet cheered him whileshe sang.As soon as Natasha had finished she went up to him and asked how heliked her voice. She asked this and then became confused, feeling thatshe ought not to have asked it. He smiled, looking at her, and said heliked her singing as he liked everything she did.Prince Andrew left the Rostovs' late in the evening. He went to bed fromhabit, but soon realized that he could not sleep. Having lit his candlehe sat up in bed, then got up, then lay down again not at all troubledby his sleeplessness: his soul was as fresh and joyful as if he hadstepped out of a stuffy room into God's own fresh air. It did not enterhis head that he was in love with Natasha; he was not thinking abouther, but only picturing her to himself, and in consequence all lifeappeared in a new light. "Why do I strive, why do I toil in this narrow,confined frame, when life, all life with all its joys, is open to me?"said he to himself. And for the first time for a very long while hebegan making happy plans for the future. He decided that he must attendto his son's education by finding a tutor and putting the boy in hischarge, then he ought to retire from the service and go abroad, and seeEngland, Switzerland and Italy. "I must use my freedom while I feel somuch strength and youth in me," he said to himself. "Pierre was rightwhen he said one must believe in the possibility of happiness in orderto be happy, and now I do believe in it. Let the dead bury their dead,but while one has life one must live and be happy!" thought he.CHAPTER XXOne morning Colonel Berg, whom Pierre knew as he knew everybody inMoscow and Petersburg, came to see him. Berg arrived in an immaculatebrand-new uniform, with his hair pomaded and brushed forward over histemples as the Emperor Alexander wore his hair."I have just been to see the countess, your wife. Unfortunately shecould not grant my request, but I hope, Count, I shall be more fortunatewith you," he said with a smile."What is it you wish, Colonel? I am at your service.""I have now quite settled in my new rooms, Count" (Berg said this withperfect conviction that this information could not but be agreeable),"and so I wish to arrange just a small party for my own and my wife'sfriends." (He smiled still more pleasantly.) "I wished to ask thecountess and you to do me the honor of coming to tea and to supper."Only Countess Helene, considering the society of such people as theBergs beneath her, could be cruel enough to refuse such an invitation.Berg explained so clearly why he wanted to collect at his house a smallbut select company, and why this would give him pleasure, and why thoughhe grudged spending money on cards or anything harmful, he was preparedto run into some expense for the sake of good society--that Pierre couldnot refuse, and promised to come."But don't be late, Count, if I may venture to ask; about ten minutes toeight, please. We shall make up a rubber. Our general is coming. He isvery good to me. We shall have supper, Count. So you will do me thefavor."Contrary to his habit of being late, Pierre on that day arrived at theBergs' house, not at ten but at fifteen minutes to eight.Having prepared everything necessary for the party, the Bergs were readyfor their guests' arrival.In their new, clean, and light study with its small busts and picturesand new furniture sat Berg and his wife. Berg, closely buttoned up inhis new uniform, sat beside his wife explaining to her that one alwayscould and should be acquainted with people above one, because only thendoes one get satisfaction from acquaintances."You can get to know something, you can ask for something. See how Imanaged from my first promotion." (Berg measured his life not by yearsbut by promotions.) "My comrades are still nobodies, while I am onlywaiting for a vacancy to command a regiment, and have the happiness tobe your husband." (He rose and kissed Vera's hand, and on the way to herstraightened out a turned-up corner of the carpet.) "And how have Iobtained all this? Chiefly by knowing how to choose my aquaintances. Itgoes without saying that one must be conscientious and methodical."Berg smiled with a sense of his superiority over a weak woman, andpaused, reflecting that this dear wife of his was after all but a weakwoman who could not understand all that constitutes a man's dignity,what it was ein Mann zu sein. * Vera at the same time smiling with asense of superiority over her good, conscientious husband, who all thesame understood life wrongly, as according to Vera all men did. Berg,judging by his wife, thought all women weak and foolish. Vera, judgingonly by her husband and generalizing from that observation, supposedthat all men, though they understand nothing and are conceited andselfish, ascribe common sense to themselves alone.* To be a man.Berg rose and embraced his wife carefully, so as not to crush her lacefichu for which he had paid a good price, kissing her straight on thelips."The only thing is, we mustn't have children too soon," he continued,following an unconscious sequence of ideas."Yes," answered Vera, "I don't at all want that. We must live forsociety.""Princess Yusupova wore one exactly like this," said Berg, pointing tothe fichu with a happy and kindly smile.Just then Count Bezukhov was announced. Husband and wife glanced at oneanother, both smiling with self-satisfaction, and each mentally claimingthe honor of this visit."This is what comes of knowing how to make acquaintances," thought Berg."This is what comes of knowing how to conduct oneself.""But please don't interrupt me when I am entertaining the guests," saidVera, "because I know what interests each of them and what to say todifferent people."Berg smiled again."It can't be helped: men must sometimes have masculine conversation,"said he.They received Pierre in their small, new drawing-room, where it wasimpossible to sit down anywhere without disturbing its symmetry,neatness, and order; so it was quite comprehensible and not strange thatBerg, having generously offered to disturb the symmetry of an armchairor of the sofa for his dear guest, but being apparently painfullyundecided on the matter himself, eventually left the visitor to settlethe question of selection. Pierre disturbed the symmetry by moving achair for himself, and Berg and Vera immediately began their eveningparty, interrupting each other in their efforts to entertain theirguest.Vera, having decided in her own mind that Pierre ought to be entertainedwith conversation about the French embassy, at once began accordingly.Berg, having decided that masculine conversation was required,interrupted his wife's remarks and touched on the question of the warwith Austria, and unconsciously jumped from the general subject topersonal considerations as to the proposals made him to take part in theAustrian campaign and the reasons why he had declined them. Though theconversation was very incoherent and Vera was angry at the intrusion ofthe masculine element, both husband and wife felt with satisfactionthat, even if only one guest was present, their evening had begun verywell and was as like as two peas to every other evening party with itstalk, tea, and lighted candles.Before long Boris, Berg's old comrade, arrived. There was a shade ofcondescension and patronage in his treatment of Berg and Vera. AfterBoris came a lady with the colonel, then the general himself, then theRostovs, and the party became unquestionably exactly like all otherevening parties. Berg and Vera could not repress their smiles ofsatisfaction at the sight of all this movement in their drawing room, atthe sound of the disconnected talk, the rustling of dresses, and thebowing and scraping. Everything was just as everybody always has it,especially so the general, who admired the apartment, patted Berg on theshoulder, and with parental authority superintended the setting out ofthe table for boston. The general sat down by Count Ilya Rostov, who wasnext to himself the most important guest. The old people sat with theold, the young with the young, and the hostess at the tea table, onwhich stood exactly the same kind of cakes in a silver cake basket asthe Panins had at their party. Everything was just as it was everywhereelse.CHAPTER XXIPierre, as one of the principal guests, had to sit down to boston withCount Rostov, the general, and the colonel. At the card table hehappened to be directly facing Natasha, and was struck by a curiouschange that had come over her since the ball. She was silent, and notonly less pretty than at the ball, but only redeemed from plainness byher look of gentle indifference to everything around."What's the matter with her?" thought Pierre, glancing at her. She wassitting by her sister at the tea table, and reluctantly, without lookingat him, made some reply to Boris who sat down beside her. After playingout a whole suit and to his partner's delight taking five tricks,Pierre, hearing greetings and the steps of someone who had entered theroom while he was picking up his tricks, glanced again at Natasha."What has happened to her?" he asked himself with still greatersurprise.Prince Andrew was standing before her, saying something to her with alook of tender solicitude. She, having raised her head, was looking upat him, flushed and evidently trying to master her rapid breathing. Andthe bright glow of some inner fire that had been suppressed was againalight in her. She was completely transformed and from a plain girl hadagain become what she had been at the ball.Prince Andrew went up to Pierre, and the latter noticed a new andyouthful expression in his friend's face.Pierre changed places several times during the game, sitting now withhis back to Natasha and now facing her, but during the whole of the sixrubbers he watched her and his friend."Something very important is happening between them," thought Pierre,and a feeling that was both joyful and painful agitated him and made himneglect the game.After six rubbers the general got up, saying that it was no use playinglike that, and Pierre was released. Natasha on one side was talking withSonya and Boris, and Vera with a subtle smile was saying something toPrince Andrew. Pierre went up to his friend and, asking whether theywere talking secrets, sat down beside them. Vera, having noticed PrinceAndrew's attentions to Natasha, decided that at a party, a real eveningparty, subtle allusions to the tender passion were absolutely necessaryand, seizing a moment when Prince Andrew was alone, began a conversationwith him about feelings in general and about her sister. With sointellectual a guest as she considered Prince Andrew to be, she feltthat she had to employ her diplomatic tact.When Pierre went up to them he noticed that Vera was being carried awayby her self-satisfied talk, but that Prince Andrew seemed embarrassed, athing that rarely happened with him."What do you think?" Vera was saying with an arch smile. "You are sodiscerning, Prince, and understand people's characters so well at aglance. What do you think of Natalie? Could she be constant in herattachments? Could she, like other women" (Vera meant herself), "love aman once for all and remain true to him forever? That is what I considertrue love. What do you think, Prince?""I know your sister too little," replied Prince Andrew, with a sarcasticsmile under which he wished to hide his embarrassment, "to be able tosolve so delicate a question, and then I have noticed that the lessattractive a woman is the more constant she is likely to be," he added,and looked up at Pierre who was just approaching them."Yes, that is true, Prince. In our days," continued Vera--mentioning"our days" as people of limited intelligence are fond of doing,imagining that they have discovered and appraised the peculiarities of"our days" and that human characteristics change with the times--"in ourdays a girl has so much freedom that the pleasure of being courted oftenstifles real feeling in her. And it must be confessed that Natalie isvery susceptible." This return to the subject of Natalie caused PrinceAndrew to knit his brows with discomfort: he was about to rise, but Veracontinued with a still more subtle smile:"I think no one has been more courted than she," she went on, "but tillquite lately she never cared seriously for anyone. Now you know, Count,"she said to Pierre, "even our dear cousin Boris, who, between ourselves,was very far gone in the land of tenderness..." (alluding to a map oflove much in vogue at that time).Prince Andrew frowned and remained silent."You are friendly with Boris, aren't you?" asked Vera."Yes, I know him...""I expect he has told you of his childish love for Natasha?""Oh, there was childish love?" suddenly asked Prince Andrew, blushingunexpectedly."Yes, you know between cousins intimacy often leads to love. Lecousinage est un dangereux voisinage. * Don't you think so?"* "Cousinhood is a dangerous neighborhood.""Oh, undoubtedly!" said Prince Andrew, and with sudden and unnaturalliveliness he began chaffing Pierre about the need to be very carefulwith his fifty-year-old Moscow cousins, and in the midst of thesejesting remarks he rose, taking Pierre by the arm, and drew him aside."Well?" asked Pierre, seeing his friend's strange animation withsurprise, and noticing the glance he turned on Natasha as he rose."I must... I must have a talk with you," said Prince Andrew. "You knowthat pair of women's gloves?" (He referred to the masonic gloves givento a newly initiated Brother to present to the woman he loved.) "I...but no, I will talk to you later on," and with a strange light in hiseyes and restlessness in his movements, Prince Andrew approached Natashaand sat down beside her. Pierre saw how Prince Andrew asked hersomething and how she flushed as she replied.But at that moment Berg came to Pierre and began insisting that heshould take part in an argument between the general and the colonel onthe affairs in Spain.Berg was satisfied and happy. The smile of pleasure never left his face.The party was very successful and quite like other parties he had seen.Everything was similar: the ladies' subtle talk, the cards, the generalraising his voice at the card table, and the samovar and the tea cakes;only one thing was lacking that he had always seen at the eveningparties he wished to imitate. They had not yet had a loud conversationamong the men and a dispute about something important and clever. Nowthe general had begun such a discussion and so Berg drew Pierre to it.CHAPTER XXIINext day, having been invited by the count, Prince Andrew dined with theRostovs and spent the rest of the day there.Everyone in the house realized for whose sake Prince Andrew came, andwithout concealing it he tried to be with Natasha all day. Not only inthe soul of the frightened yet happy and enraptured Natasha, but in thewhole house, there was a feeling of awe at something important that wasbound to happen. The countess looked with sad and sternly serious eyesat Prince Andrew when he talked to Natasha and timidly started someartificial conversation about trifles as soon as he looked her way.Sonya was afraid to leave Natasha and afraid of being in the way whenshe was with them. Natasha grew pale, in a panic of expectation, whenshe remained alone with him for a moment. Prince Andrew surprised her byhis timidity. She felt that he wanted to say something to her but couldnot bring himself to do so.In the evening, when Prince Andrew had left, the countess went up toNatasha and whispered: "Well, what?""Mamma! For heaven's sake don't ask me anything now! One can't talkabout that," said Natasha.But all the same that night Natasha, now agitated and now frightened,lay a long time in her mother's bed gazing straight before her. She toldher how he had complimented her, how he told her he was going abroad,asked her where they were going to spend the summer, and then how he hadasked her about Boris."But such a... such a... never happened to me before!" she said. "Only Ifeel afraid in his presence. I am always afraid when I'm with him. Whatdoes that mean? Does it mean that it's the real thing? Yes? Mamma, areyou asleep?""No, my love; I am frightened myself," answered her mother. "Now go!""All the same I shan't sleep. What silliness, to sleep! Mummy! Mummy!such a thing never happened to me before," she said, surprised andalarmed at the feeling she was aware of in herself. "And could we everhave thought!..."It seemed to Natasha that even at the time she first saw Prince Andrewat Otradnoe she had fallen in love with him. It was as if she fearedthis strange, unexpected happiness of meeting again the very man she hadthen chosen (she was firmly convinced she had done so) and of findinghim, as it seemed, not indifferent to her."And it had to happen that he should come specially to Petersburg whilewe are here. And it had to happen that we should meet at that ball. Itis fate. Clearly it is fate that everything led up to this! Alreadythen, directly I saw him I felt something peculiar.""What else did he say to you? What are those verses? Read them..." saidher mother, thoughtfully, referring to some verses Prince Andrew hadwritten in Natasha's album."Mamma, one need not be ashamed of his being a widower?""Don't, Natasha! Pray to God. 'Marriages are made in heaven,'" said hermother."Darling Mummy, how I love you! How happy I am!" cried Natasha, sheddingtears of joy and excitement and embracing her mother.At that very time Prince Andrew was sitting with Pierre and telling himof his love for Natasha and his firm resolve to make her his wife.That day Countess Helene had a reception at her house. The Frenchambassador was there, and a foreign prince of the blood who had of latebecome a frequent visitor of hers, and many brilliant ladies andgentlemen. Pierre, who had come downstairs, walked through the rooms andstruck everyone by his preoccupied, absent-minded, and morose air.Since the ball he had felt the approach of a fit of nervous depressionand had made desperate efforts to combat it. Since the intimacy of hiswife with the royal prince, Pierre had unexpectedly been made agentleman of the bedchamber, and from that time he had begun to feeloppressed and ashamed in court society, and dark thoughts of the vanityof all things human came to him oftener than before. At the same timethe feeling he had noticed between his protegee Natasha and PrinceAndrew accentuated his gloom by the contrast between his own positionand his friend's. He tried equally to avoid thinking about his wife, andabout Natasha and Prince Andrew; and again everything seemed to himinsignificant in comparison with eternity; again the question: for what?presented itself; and he forced himself to work day and night at masoniclabors, hoping to drive away the evil spirit that threatened him. Towardmidnight, after he had left the countess' apartments, he was sittingupstairs in a shabby dressing gown, copying out the original transactionof the Scottish lodge of Freemasons at a table in his low room cloudywith tobacco smoke, when someone came in. It was Prince Andrew."Ah, it's you!" said Pierre with a preoccupied, dissatisfied air. "AndI, you see, am hard at it." He pointed to his manuscript book with thatair of escaping from the ills of life with which unhappy people look attheir work.Prince Andrew, with a beaming, ecstatic expression of renewed life onhis face, paused in front of Pierre and, not noticing his sad look,smiled at him with the egotism of joy."Well, dear heart," said he, "I wanted to tell you about it yesterdayand I have come to do so today. I never experienced anything like itbefore. I am in love, my friend!"Suddenly Pierre heaved a deep sigh and dumped his heavy person down onthe sofa beside Prince Andrew."With Natasha Rostova, yes?" said he."Yes, yes! Who else should it be? I should never have believed it, butthe feeling is stronger than I. Yesterday I tormented myself andsuffered, but I would not exchange even that torment for anything in theworld, I have not lived till now. At last I live, but I can't livewithout her! But can she love me?... I am too old for her.... Why don'tyou speak?""I? I? What did I tell you?" said Pierre suddenly, rising and beginningto pace up and down the room. "I always thought it.... That girl is sucha treasure... she is a rare girl.... My dear friend, I entreat you,don't philosophize, don't doubt, marry, marry, marry.... And I am surethere will not be a happier man than you.""But what of her?""She loves you.""Don't talk rubbish..." said Prince Andrew, smiling and looking intoPierre's eyes."She does, I know," Pierre cried fiercely."But do listen," returned Prince Andrew, holding him by the arm. "Do youknow the condition I am in? I must talk about it to someone.""Well, go on, go on. I am very glad," said Pierre, and his face reallychanged, his brow became smooth, and he listened gladly to PrinceAndrew. Prince Andrew seemed, and really was, quite a different, quite anew man. Where was his spleen, his contempt for life, hisdisillusionment? Pierre was the only person to whom he made up his mindto speak openly; and to him he told all that was in his soul. Now heboldly and lightly made plans for an extended future, said he could notsacrifice his own happiness to his father's caprice, and spoke of how hewould either make his father consent to this marriage and love her, orwould do without his consent; then he marveled at the feeling that hadmastered him as at something strange, apart from and independent ofhimself."I should not have believed anyone who told me that I was capable ofsuch love," said Prince Andrew. "It is not at all the same feeling thatI knew in the past. The whole world is now for me divided into twohalves: one half is she, and there all is joy, hope, light: the otherhalf is everything where she is not, and there is all gloom anddarkness....""Darkness and gloom," reiterated Pierre: "yes, yes, I understand that.""I cannot help loving the light, it is not my fault. And I am veryhappy! You understand me? I know you are glad for my sake.""Yes, yes," Pierre assented, looking at his friend with a touched andsad expression in his eyes. The brighter Prince Andrew's lot appeared tohim, the gloomier seemed his own.CHAPTER XXIIIPrince Andrew needed his father's consent to his marriage, and to obtainthis he started for the country next day.His father received his son's communication with external composure, butinward wrath. He could not comprehend how anyone could wish to alter hislife or introduce anything new into it, when his own life was alreadyending. "If only they would let me end my days as I want to," thoughtthe old man, "then they might do as they please." With his son, however,he employed the diplomacy he reserved for important occasions and,adopting a quiet tone, discussed the whole matter.In the first place the marriage was not a brilliant one as regardsbirth, wealth, or rank. Secondly, Prince Andrew was no longer as youngas he had been and his health was poor (the old man laid special stresson this), while she was very young. Thirdly, he had a son whom it wouldbe a pity to entrust to a chit of a girl. "Fourthly and finally," thefather said, looking ironically at his son, "I beg you to put it off fora year: go abroad, take a cure, look out as you wanted to for a Germantutor for Prince Nicholas. Then if your love or passion or obstinacy--asyou please--is still as great, marry! And that's my last word on it.Mind, the last..." concluded the prince, in a tone which showed thatnothing would make him alter his decision.Prince Andrew saw clearly that the old man hoped that his feelings, orhis fiancee's, would not stand a year's test, or that he (the old princehimself) would die before then, and he decided to conform to hisfather's wish--to propose, and postpone the wedding for a year.Three weeks after the last evening he had spent with the Rostovs, PrinceAndrew returned to Petersburg.Next day after her talk with her mother Natasha expected Bolkonski allday, but he did not come. On the second and third day it was the same.Pierre did not come either and Natasha, not knowing that Prince Andrewhad gone to see his father, could not explain his absence to herself.Three weeks passed in this way. Natasha had no desire to go out anywhereand wandered from room to room like a shadow, idle and listless; shewept secretly at night and did not go to her mother in the evenings. Sheblushed continually and was irritable. It seemed to her that everybodyknew about her disappointment and was laughing at her and pitying her.Strong as was her inward grief, this wound to her vanity intensified hermisery.Once she came to her mother, tried to say something, and suddenly beganto cry. Her tears were those of an offended child who does not know whyit is being punished.The countess began to soothe Natasha, who after first listening to hermother's words, suddenly interrupted her:"Leave off, Mamma! I don't think, and don't want to think about it! Hejust came and then left off, left off..."Her voice trembled, and she again nearly cried, but recovered and wenton quietly:"And I don't at all want to get married. And I am afraid of him; I havenow become quite calm, quite calm."The day after this conversation Natasha put on the old dress which sheknew had the peculiar property of conducing to cheerfulness in themornings, and that day she returned to the old way of life which she hadabandoned since the ball. Having finished her morning tea she went tothe ballroom, which she particularly liked for its loud resonance, andbegan singing her solfeggio. When she had finished her first exerciseshe stood still in the middle of the room and sang a musical phrase thatparticularly pleased her. She listened joyfully (as though she had notexpected it) to the charm of the notes reverberating, filling the wholeempty ballroom, and slowly dying away; and all at once she feltcheerful. "What's the good of making so much of it? Things are nice asit is," she said to herself, and she began walking up and down the room,not stepping simply on the resounding parquet but treading with eachstep from the heel to the toe (she had on a new and favorite pair ofshoes) and listening to the regular tap of the heel and creak of the toeas gladly as she had to the sounds of her own voice. Passing a mirrorshe glanced into it. "There, that's me!" the expression of her faceseemed to say as she caught sight of herself. "Well, and very nice too!I need nobody."A footman wanted to come in to clear away something in the room but shewould not let him, and having closed the door behind him continued herwalk. That morning she had returned to her favorite mood--love of, anddelight in, herself. "How charming that Natasha is!" she said again,speaking as some third, collective, male person. "Pretty, a good voice,young, and in nobody's way if only they leave her in peace." But howevermuch they left her in peace she could not now be at peace, andimmediately felt this.In the hall the porch door opened, and someone asked, "At home?" andthen footsteps were heard. Natasha was looking at the mirror, but didnot see herself. She listened to the sounds in the hall. When she sawherself, her face was pale. It was he. She knew this for certain, thoughshe hardly heard his voice through the closed doors.Pale and agitated, Natasha ran into the drawing room."Mamma! Bolkonski has come!" she said. "Mamma, it is awful, it isunbearable! I don't want... to be tormented? What am I to do?..."Before the countess could answer, Prince Andrew entered the room with anagitated and serious face. As soon as he saw Natasha his facebrightened. He kissed the countess' hand and Natasha's, and sat downbeside the sofa."It is long since we had the pleasure..." began the countess, but PrinceAndrew interrupted her by answering her intended question, obviously inhaste to say what he had to."I have not been to see you all this time because I have been at myfather's. I had to talk over a very important matter with him. I onlygot back last night," he said glancing at Natasha; "I want to have atalk with you, Countess," he added after a moment's pause.The countess lowered her eyes, sighing deeply."I am at your disposal," she murmured.Natasha knew that she ought to go away, but was unable to do so:something gripped her throat, and regardless of manners she staredstraight at Prince Andrew with wide-open eyes."At once? This instant!... No, it can't be!" she thought.Again he glanced at her, and that glance convinced her that she was notmistaken. Yes, at once, that very instant, her fate would be decided."Go, Natasha! I will call you," said the countess in a whisper.Natasha glanced with frightened imploring eyes at Prince Andrew and ather mother and went out."I have come, Countess, to ask for your daughter's hand," said PrinceAndrew.The countess' face flushed hotly, but she said nothing."Your offer..." she began at last sedately. He remained silent, lookinginto her eyes. "Your offer..." (she grew confused) "is agreeable to us,and I accept your offer. I am glad. And my husband... I hope... but itwill depend on her....""I will speak to her when I have your consent.... Do you give it to me?"said Prince Andrew."Yes," replied the countess. She held out her hand to him, and with amixed feeling of estrangement and tenderness pressed her lips to hisforehead as he stooped to kiss her hand. She wished to love him as ason, but felt that to her he was a stranger and a terrifying man. "I amsure my husband will consent," said the countess, "but your father...""My father, to whom I have told my plans, has made it an expresscondition of his consent that the wedding is not to take place for ayear. And I wished to tell you of that," said Prince Andrew."It is true that Natasha is still young, but--so long as that?...""It is unavoidable," said Prince Andrew with a sigh."I will send her to you," said the countess, and left the room."Lord have mercy upon us!" she repeated while seeking her daughter.Sonya said that Natasha was in her bedroom. Natasha was sitting on thebed, pale and dry eyed, and was gazing at the icons and whisperingsomething as she rapidly crossed herself. Seeing her mother she jumpedup and flew to her."Well, Mamma?... Well?...""Go, go to him. He is asking for your hand," said the countess, coldlyit seemed to Natasha. "Go... go," said the mother, sadly andreproachfully, with a deep sigh, as her daughter ran away.Natasha never remembered how she entered the drawing room. When she camein and saw him she paused. "Is it possible that this stranger has nowbecome everything to me?" she asked herself, and immediately answered,"Yes, everything! He alone is now dearer to me than everything in theworld." Prince Andrew came up to her with downcast eyes."I have loved you from the very first moment I saw you. May I hope?"He looked at her and was struck by the serious impassioned expression ofher face. Her face said: "Why ask? Why doubt what you cannot but know?Why speak, when words cannot express what one feels?"She drew near to him and stopped. He took her hand and kissed it."Do you love me?""Yes, yes!" Natasha murmured as if in vexation. Then she sighed loudlyand, catching her breath more and more quickly, began to sob."What is it? What's the matter?""Oh, I am so happy!" she replied, smiled through her tears, bent overcloser to him, paused for an instant as if asking herself whether shemight, and then kissed him.Prince Andrew held her hands, looked into her eyes, and did not find inhis heart his former love for her. Something in him had suddenlychanged; there was no longer the former poetic and mystic charm ofdesire, but there was pity for her feminine and childish weakness, fearat her devotion and trustfulness, and an oppressive yet joyful sense ofthe duty that now bound him to her forever. The present feeling, thoughnot so bright and poetic as the former, was stronger and more serious."Did your mother tell you that it cannot be for a year?" asked PrinceAndrew, still looking into her eyes."Is it possible that I--the 'chit of a girl,' as everybody called me,"thought Natasha--"is it possible that I am now to be the wife and theequal of this strange, dear, clever man whom even my father looks up to?Can it be true? Can it be true that there can be no more playing withlife, that now I am grown up, that on me now lies a responsibility formy every word and deed? Yes, but what did he ask me?""No," she replied, but she had not understood his question."Forgive me!" he said. "But you are so young, and I have already beenthrough so much in life. I am afraid for you, you do not yet knowyourself."Natasha listened with concentrated attention, trying but failing to takein the meaning of his words."Hard as this year which delays my happiness will be," continued PrinceAndrew, "it will give you time to be sure of yourself. I ask you to makeme happy in a year, but you are free: our engagement shall remain asecret, and should you find that you do not love me, or should you cometo love..." said Prince Andrew with an unnatural smile."Why do you say that?" Natasha interrupted him. "You know that from thevery day you first came to Otradnoe I have loved you," she cried, quiteconvinced that she spoke the truth."In a year you will learn to know yourself....""A whole year!" Natasha repeated suddenly, only now realizing that themarriage was to be postponed for a year. "But why a year? Why ayear?..."Prince Andrew began to explain to her the reasons for this delay.Natasha did not hear him."And can't it be helped?" she asked. Prince Andrew did not reply, buthis face expressed the impossibility of altering that decision."It's awful! Oh, it's awful! awful!" Natasha suddenly cried, and againburst into sobs. "I shall die, waiting a year: it's impossible, it'sawful!" She looked into her lover's face and saw in it a look ofcommiseration and perplexity."No, no! I'll do anything!" she said, suddenly checking her tears. "I amso happy."The father and mother came into the room and gave the betrothed coupletheir blessing.From that day Prince Andrew began to frequent the Rostovs' as Natasha'saffianced lover.CHAPTER XXIVNo betrothal ceremony took place and Natasha's engagement to Bolkonskiwas not announced; Prince Andrew insisted on that. He said that as hewas responsible for the delay he ought to bear the whole burden of it;that he had given his word and bound himself forever, but that he didnot wish to bind Natasha and gave her perfect freedom. If after sixmonths she felt that she did not love him she would have full right toreject him. Naturally neither Natasha nor her parents wished to hear ofthis, but Prince Andrew was firm. He came every day to the Rostovs', butdid not behave to Natasha as an affianced lover: he did not use thefamiliar thou, but said you to her, and kissed only her hand. Aftertheir engagement, quite different, intimate, and natural relationssprang up between them. It was as if they had not known each other tillnow. Both liked to recall how they had regarded each other when as yetthey were nothing to one another; they felt themselves now quitedifferent beings: then they were artificial, now natural and sincere. Atfirst the family felt some constraint in intercourse with Prince Andrew;he seemed a man from another world, and for a long time Natasha trainedthe family to get used to him, proudly assuring them all that he onlyappeared to be different, but was really just like all of them, and thatshe was not afraid of him and no one else ought to be. After a few daysthey grew accustomed to him, and without restraint in his presencepursued their usual way of life, in which he took his part. He couldtalk about rural economy with the count, fashions with the countess andNatasha, and about albums and fancywork with Sonya. Sometimes thehousehold both among themselves and in his presence expressed theirwonder at how it had all happened, and at the evident omens there hadbeen of it: Prince Andrew's coming to Otradnoe and their coming toPetersburg, and the likeness between Natasha and Prince Andrew which hernurse had noticed on his first visit, and Andrew's encounter withNicholas in 1805, and many other incidents betokening that it had to be.In the house that poetic dullness and quiet reigned which alwaysaccompanies the presence of a betrothed couple. Often when all sittingtogether everyone kept silent. Sometimes the others would get up and goaway and the couple, left alone, still remained silent. They rarelyspoke of their future life. Prince Andrew was afraid and ashamed tospeak of it. Natasha shared this as she did all his feelings, which sheconstantly divined. Once she began questioning him about his son. PrinceAndrew blushed, as he often did now--Natasha particularly liked it inhim--and said that his son would not live with them."Why not?" asked Natasha in a frightened tone."I cannot take him away from his grandfather, and besides...""How I should have loved him!" said Natasha, immediately guessing histhought; "but I know you wish to avoid any pretext for finding faultwith us."Sometimes the old count would come up, kiss Prince Andrew, and ask hisadvice about Petya's education or Nicholas' service. The old countesssighed as she looked at them; Sonya was always getting frightened lestshe should be in the way and tried to find excuses for leaving themalone, even when they did not wish it. When Prince Andrew spoke (hecould tell a story very well), Natasha listened to him with pride; whenshe spoke she noticed with fear and joy that he gazed attentively andscrutinizingly at her. She asked herself in perplexity: "What does helook for in me? He is trying to discover something by looking at me!What if what he seeks in me is not there?" Sometimes she fell into oneof the mad, merry moods characteristic of her, and then she particularlyloved to hear and see how Prince Andrew laughed. He seldom laughed, butwhen he did he abandoned himself entirely to his laughter, and aftersuch a laugh she always felt nearer to him. Natasha would have beencompletely happy if the thought of the separation awaiting her anddrawing near had not terrified her, just as the mere thought of it madehim turn pale and cold.On the eve of his departure from Petersburg Prince Andrew brought withhim Pierre, who had not been to the Rostovs' once since the ball. Pierreseemed disconcerted and embarrassed. He was talking to the countess, andNatasha sat down beside a little chess table with Sonya, therebyinviting Prince Andrew to come too. He did so."You have known Bezukhov a long time?" he asked. "Do you like him?""Yes, he's a dear, but very absurd."And as usual when speaking of Pierre, she began to tell anecdotes of hisabsent-mindedness, some of which had even been invented about him."Do you know I have entrusted him with our secret? I have known him fromchildhood. He has a heart of gold. I beg you, Natalie," Prince Andrewsaid with sudden seriousness--"I am going away and heaven knows what mayhappen. You may cease to... all right, I know I am not to say that. Onlythis, then: whatever may happen to you when I am not here...""What can happen?""Whatever trouble may come," Prince Andrew continued, "I beg you,Mademoiselle Sophie, whatever may happen, to turn to him alone foradvice and help! He is a most absent-minded and absurd fellow, but hehas a heart of gold."Neither her father, nor her mother, nor Sonya, nor Prince Andrew himselfcould have foreseen how the separation from her lover would act onNatasha. Flushed and agitated she went about the house all that day,dry-eyed, occupied with most trivial matters as if not understandingwhat awaited her. She did not even cry when, on taking leave, he kissedher hand for the last time. "Don't go!" she said in a tone that made himwonder whether he really ought not to stay and which he remembered longafterwards. Nor did she cry when he was gone; but for several days shesat in her room dry-eyed, taking no interest in anything and only sayingnow and then, "Oh, why did he go away?"But a fortnight after his departure, to the surprise of those aroundher, she recovered from her mental sickness just as suddenly and becameher old self again, but with a change in her moral physiognomy, as achild gets up after a long illness with a changed expression of face.CHAPTER XXVDuring that year after his son's departure, Prince Nicholas Bolkonski'shealth and temper became much worse. He grew still more irritable, andit was Princess Mary who generally bore the brunt of his frequent fitsof unprovoked anger. He seemed carefully to seek out her tender spots soas to torture her mentally as harshly as possible. Princess Mary had twopassions and consequently two joys--her nephew, little Nicholas, andreligion--and these were the favorite subjects of the prince's attacksand ridicule. Whatever was spoken of he would bring round to thesuperstitiousness of old maids, or the petting and spoiling of children."You want to make him"--little Nicholas--"into an old maid likeyourself! A pity! Prince Andrew wants a son and not an old maid," hewould say. Or, turning to Mademoiselle Bourienne, he would ask her inPrincess Mary's presence how she liked our village priests and icons andwould joke about them.He continually hurt Princess Mary's feelings and tormented her, but itcost her no effort to forgive him. Could he be to blame toward her, orcould her father, whom she knew loved her in spite of it all, be unjust?And what is justice? The princess never thought of that proud word"justice." All the complex laws of man centered for her in one clear andsimple law--the law of love and self-sacrifice taught us by Him wholovingly suffered for mankind though He Himself was God. What had she todo with the justice or injustice of other people? She had to endure andlove, and that she did.During the winter Prince Andrew had come to Bald Hills and had been gay,gentle, and more affectionate than Princess Mary had known him for along time past. She felt that something had happened to him, but he saidnothing to her about his love. Before he left he had a long talk withhis father about something, and Princess Mary noticed that before hisdeparture they were dissatisfied with one another.Soon after Prince Andrew had gone, Princess Mary wrote to her friendJulie Karagina in Petersburg, whom she had dreamed (as all girls dream)of marrying to her brother, and who was at that time in mourning for herown brother, killed in Turkey.Sorrow, it seems, is our common lot, my dear, tender friend Julie.Your loss is so terrible that I can only explain it to myself as aspecial providence of God who, loving you, wishes to try you and yourexcellent mother. Oh, my friend! Religion, and religion alone, can--Iwill not say comfort us--but save us from despair. Religion alone canexplain to us what without its help man cannot comprehend: why, for whatcause, kind and noble beings able to find happiness in life--not merelyharming no one but necessary to the happiness of others--are called awayto God, while cruel, useless, harmful persons, or such as are a burdento themselves and to others, are left living. The first death I saw, andone I shall never forget--that of my dear sister-in-law--left thatimpression on me. Just as you ask destiny why your splendid brother hadto die, so I asked why that angel Lise, who not only never wrongedanyone, but in whose soul there were never any unkind thoughts, had todie. And what do you think, dear friend? Five years have passed sincethen, and already I, with my petty understanding, begin to see clearlywhy she had to die, and in what way that death was but an expression ofthe infinite goodness of the Creator, whose every action, thoughgenerally incomprehensible to us, is but a manifestation of His infinitelove for His creatures. Perhaps, I often think, she was too angelicallyinnocent to have the strength to perform all a mother's duties. As ayoung wife she was irreproachable; perhaps she could not have been so asa mother. As it is, not only has she left us, and particularly PrinceAndrew, with the purest regrets and memories, but probably she willthere receive a place I dare not hope for myself. But not to speak ofher alone, that early and terrible death has had the most beneficentinfluence on me and on my brother in spite of all our grief. Then, atthe moment of our loss, these thoughts could not occur to me; I shouldthen have dismissed them with horror, but now they are very clear andcertain. I write all this to you, dear friend, only to convince you ofthe Gospel truth which has become for me a principle of life: not asingle hair of our heads will fall without His will. And His will isgoverned only by infinite love for us, and so whatever befalls us is forour good.You ask whether we shall spend next winter in Moscow. In spite of mywish to see you, I do not think so and do not want to do so. You will besurprised to hear that the reason for this is Buonaparte! The case isthis: my father's health is growing noticeably worse, he cannot standany contradiction and is becoming irritable. This irritability is, asyou know, chiefly directed to political questions. He cannot endure thenotion that Buonaparte is negotiating on equal terms with all thesovereigns of Europe and particularly with our own, the grandson of theGreat Catherine! As you know, I am quite indifferent to politics, butfrom my father's remarks and his talks with Michael Ivanovich I know allthat goes on in the world and especially about the honors conferred onBuonaparte, who only at Bald Hills in the whole world, it seems, is notaccepted as a great man, still less as Emperor of France. And my fathercannot stand this. It seems to me that it is chiefly because of hispolitical views that my father is reluctant to speak of going to Moscow;for he foresees the encounters that would result from his way ofexpressing his views regardless of anybody. All the benefit he mightderive from a course of treatment he would lose as a result of thedisputes about Buonaparte which would be inevitable. In any case it willbe decided very shortly.Our family life goes on in the old way except for my brother Andrew'sabsence. He, as I wrote you before, has changed very much of late. Afterhis sorrow he only this year quite recovered his spirits. He has againbecome as I used to know him when a child: kind, affectionate, with thatheart of gold to which I know no equal. He has realized, it seems to me,that life is not over for him. But together with this mental change hehas grown physically much weaker. He has become thinner and morenervous. I am anxious about him and glad he is taking this trip abroadwhich the doctors recommended long ago. I hope it will cure him. Youwrite that in Petersburg he is spoken of as one of the most active,cultivated, and capable of the young men. Forgive my vanity as arelation, but I never doubted it. The good he has done to everybodyhere, from his peasants up to the gentry, is incalculable. On hisarrival in Petersburg he received only his due. I always wonder at theway rumors fly from Petersburg to Moscow, especially such false ones asthat you write about--I mean the report of my brother's betrothal to thelittle Rostova. I do not think my brother will ever marry again, andcertainly not her; and this is why: first, I know that though he rarelyspeaks about the wife he has lost, the grief of that loss has gone toodeep in his heart for him ever to decide to give her a successor and ourlittle angel a stepmother. Secondly because, as far as I know, that girlis not the kind of girl who could please Prince Andrew. I do not thinkhe would choose her for a wife, and frankly I do not wish it. But I amrunning on too long and am at the end of my second sheet. Good-bye, mydear friend. May God keep you in His holy and mighty care. My dearfriend, Mademoiselle Bourienne, sends you kisses.MARYCHAPTER XXVIIn the middle of the summer Princess Mary received an unexpected letterfrom Prince Andrew in Switzerland in which he gave her strange andsurprising news. He informed her of his engagement to Natasha Rostova.The whole letter breathed loving rapture for his betrothed and tenderand confiding affection for his sister. He wrote that he had never lovedas he did now and that only now did he understand and know what lifewas. He asked his sister to forgive him for not having told her of hisresolve when he had last visited Bald Hills, though he had spoken of itto his father. He had not done so for fear Princess Mary should ask herfather to give his consent, irritating him and having to bear the bruntof his displeasure without attaining her object. "Besides," he wrote,"the matter was not then so definitely settled as it is now. My fatherthen insisted on a delay of a year and now already six months, half ofthat period, have passed, and my resolution is firmer than ever. If thedoctors did not keep me here at the spas I should be back in Russia, butas it is I have to postpone my return for three months. You know me andmy relations with Father. I want nothing from him. I have been andalways shall be independent; but to go against his will and arouse hisanger, now that he may perhaps remain with us such a short time, woulddestroy half my happiness. I am now writing to him about the samequestion, and beg you to choose a good moment to hand him the letter andto let me know how he looks at the whole matter and whether there ishope that he may consent to reduce the term by four months."After long hesitations, doubts, and prayers, Princess Mary gave theletter to her father. The next day the old prince said to her quietly:"Write and tell your brother to wait till I am dead.... It won't belong--I shall soon set him free."The princess was about to reply, but her father would not let her speakand, raising his voice more and more, cried:"Marry, marry, my boy!... A good family!... Clever people, eh? Rich, eh?Yes, a nice stepmother little Nicholas will have! Write and tell himthat he may marry tomorrow if he likes. She will be little Nicholas'stepmother and I'll marry Bourienne!... Ha, ha, ha! He mustn't bewithout a stepmother either! Only one thing, no more women are wanted inmy house--let him marry and live by himself. Perhaps you will go andlive with him too?" he added, turning to Princess Mary. "Go in heavensname! Go out into the frost... the frost... the frost!"After this outburst the prince did not speak any more about the matter.But repressed vexation at his son's poor-spirited behavior foundexpression in his treatment of his daughter. To his former pretexts forirony a fresh one was now added--allusions to stepmothers andamiabilities to Mademoiselle Bourienne."Why shouldn't I marry her?" he asked his daughter. "She'll make asplendid princess!"And latterly, to her surprise and bewilderment, Princess Mary noticedthat her father was really associating more and more with theFrenchwoman. She wrote to Prince Andrew about the reception of hisletter, but comforted him with hopes of reconciling their father to theidea.Little Nicholas and his education, her brother Andrew, and religion werePrincess Mary's joys and consolations; but besides that, since everyonemust have personal hopes, Princess Mary in the profoundest depths of herheart had a hidden dream and hope that supplied the chief consolation ofher life. This comforting dream and hope were given her by God's folk--the half-witted and other pilgrims who visited her without the prince'sknowledge. The longer she lived, the more experience and observation shehad of life, the greater was her wonder at the short-sightedness of menwho seek enjoyment and happiness here on earth: toiling, suffering,struggling, and harming one another, to obtain that impossible,visionary, sinful happiness. Prince Andrew had loved his wife, she died,but that was not enough: he wanted to bind his happiness to anotherwoman. Her father objected to this because he wanted a moredistinguished and wealthier match for Andrew. And they all struggled andsuffered and tormented one another and injured their souls, theireternal souls, for the attainment of benefits which endure but for aninstant. Not only do we know this ourselves, but Christ, the Son of God,came down to earth and told us that this life is but for a moment and isa probation; yet we cling to it and think to find happiness in it. "Howis it that no one realizes this?" thought Princess Mary. "No one exceptthese despised God's folk who, wallet on back, come to me by the backdoor, afraid of being seen by the prince, not for fear of ill-usage byhim but for fear of causing him to sin. To leave family, home, and allthe cares of worldly welfare, in order without clinging to anything towander in hempen rags from place to place under an assumed name, doingno one any harm but praying for all--for those who drive one away aswell as for those who protect one: higher than that life and truth thereis no life or truth!"There was one pilgrim, a quiet pockmarked little woman of fifty calledTheodosia, who for over thirty years had gone about barefoot and wornheavy chains. Princess Mary was particularly fond of her. Once, when ina room with a lamp dimly lit before the icon Theodosia was talking ofher life, the thought that Theodosia alone had found the true path oflife suddenly came to Princess Mary with such force that she resolved tobecome a pilgrim herself. When Theodosia had gone to sleep Princess Marythought about this for a long time, and at last made up her mind that,strange as it might seem, she must go on a pilgrimage. She disclosedthis thought to no one but to her confessor, Father Akinfi, the monk,and he approved of her intention. Under guise of a present for thepilgrims, Princess Mary prepared a pilgrim's complete costume forherself: a coarse smock, bast shoes, a rough coat, and a black kerchief.Often, approaching the chest of drawers containing this secret treasure,Princess Mary paused, uncertain whether the time had not already come toput her project into execution.Often, listening to the pilgrims' tales, she was so stimulated by theirsimple speech, mechanical to them but to her so full of deep meaning,that several times she was on the point of abandoning everything andrunning away from home. In imagination she already pictured herself byTheodosia's side, dressed in coarse rags, walking with a staff, a walleton her back, along the dusty road, directing her wanderings from onesaint's shrine to another, free from envy, earthly love, or desire, andreaching at last the place where there is no more sorrow or sighing, buteternal joy and bliss."I shall come to a place and pray there, and before having time to getused to it or getting to love it, I shall go farther. I will go on tillmy legs fail, and I'll lie down and die somewhere, and shall at lastreach that eternal, quiet haven, where there is neither sorrow norsighing..." thought Princess Mary.But afterwards, when she saw her father and especially little Koko(Nicholas), her resolve weakened. She wept quietly, and felt that shewas a sinner who loved her father and little nephew more than God.BOOK SEVEN: 1810 - 11CHAPTER IThe Bible legend tells us that the absence of labor--idleness--was acondition of the first man's blessedness before the Fall. Fallen man hasretained a love of idleness, but the curse weighs on the race not onlybecause we have to seek our bread in the sweat of our brows, but becauseour moral nature is such that we cannot be both idle and at ease. Aninner voice tells us we are in the wrong if we are idle. If man couldfind a state in which he felt that though idle he was fulfilling hisduty, he would have found one of the conditions of man's primitiveblessedness. And such a state of obligatory and irreproachable idlenessis the lot of a whole class--the military. The chief attraction ofmilitary service has consisted and will consist in this compulsory andirreproachable idleness.Nicholas Rostov experienced this blissful condition to the full when,after 1807, he continued to serve in the Pavlograd regiment, in which healready commanded the squadron he had taken over from Denisov.Rostov had become a bluff, good-natured fellow, whom his Moscowacquaintances would have considered rather bad form, but who was likedand respected by his comrades, subordinates, and superiors, and was wellcontented with his life. Of late, in 1809, he found in letters from homemore frequent complaints from his mother that their affairs were fallinginto greater and greater disorder, and that it was time for him to comeback to gladden and comfort his old parents.Reading these letters, Nicholas felt a dread of their wanting to takehim away from surroundings in which, protected from all theentanglements of life, he was living so calmly and quietly. He felt thatsooner or later he would have to re-enter that whirlpool of life, withits embarrassments and affairs to be straightened out, its accounts withstewards, quarrels, and intrigues, its ties, society, and with Sonya'slove and his promise to her. It was all dreadfully difficult andcomplicated; and he replied to his mother in cold, formal letters inFrench, beginning: "My dear Mamma," and ending: "Your obedient son,"which said nothing of when he would return. In 1810 he received lettersfrom his parents, in which they told him of Natasha's engagement toBolkonski, and that the wedding would be in a year's time because theold prince made difficulties. This letter grieved and mortifiedNicholas. In the first place he was sorry that Natasha, for whom hecared more than for anyone else in the family, should be lost to thehome; and secondly, from his hussar point of view, he regretted not tohave been there to show that fellow Bolkonski that connection with himwas no such great honor after all, and that if he loved Natasha he mightdispense with permission from his dotard father. For a moment hehesitated whether he should not apply for leave in order to see Natashabefore she was married, but then came the maneuvers, and considerationsabout Sonya and about the confusion of their affairs, and Nicholas againput it off. But in the spring of that year, he received a letter fromhis mother, written without his father's knowledge, and that letterpersuaded him to return. She wrote that if he did not come and takematters in hand, their whole property would be sold by auction and theywould all have to go begging. The count was so weak, and trusted Mitenkaso much, and was so good-natured, that everybody took advantage of himand things were going from bad to worse. "For God's sake, I implore you,come at once if you do not wish to make me and the whole familywretched," wrote the countess.This letter touched Nicholas. He had that common sense of a matter-of-fact man which showed him what he ought to do.The right thing now was, if not to retire from the service, at any rateto go home on leave. Why he had to go he did not know; but after hisafter-dinner nap he gave orders to saddle Mars, an extremely viciousgray stallion that had not been ridden for a long time, and when hereturned with the horse all in a lather, he informed Lavrushka(Denisov's servant who had remained with him) and his comrades whoturned up in the evening that he was applying for leave and was goinghome. Difficult and strange as it was for him to reflect that he wouldgo away without having heard from the staff--and this interested himextremely--whether he was promoted to a captaincy or would receive theOrder of St. Anne for the last maneuvers; strange as it was to thinkthat he would go away without having sold his three roans to the PolishCount Golukhovski, who was bargaining for the horses Rostov had bettedhe would sell for two thousand rubles; incomprehensible as it seemedthat the ball the hussars were giving in honor of the PolishMademoiselle Przazdziecka (out of rivalry to the uhlans who had givenone in honor of their Polish Mademoiselle Borzozowska) would take placewithout him--he knew he must go away from this good, bright world tosomewhere where everything was stupid and confused. A week later heobtained his leave. His hussar comrades--not only those of his ownregiment, but the whole brigade--gave Rostov a dinner to which thesubscription was fifteen rubles a head, and at which there were twobands and two choirs of singers. Rostov danced the Trepak with MajorBasov; the tipsy officers tossed, embraced, and dropped Rostov; thesoldiers of the third squadron tossed him too, and shouted "hurrah!" andthen they put him in his sleigh and escorted him as far as the firstpost station.During the first half of the journey--from Kremenchug to Kiev--allRostov's thoughts, as is usual in such cases, were behind him, with thesquadron; but when he had gone more than halfway he began to forget histhree roans and Dozhoyveyko, his quartermaster, and to wonder anxiouslyhow things would be at Otradnoe and what he would find there. Thoughtsof home grew stronger the nearer he approached it--far stronger, asthough this feeling of his was subject to the law by which the force ofattraction is in inverse proportion to the square of the distance. Atthe last post station before Otradnoe he gave the driver a three-rubletip, and on arriving he ran breathlessly, like a boy, up the steps ofhis home.After the rapture of meeting, and after that odd feeling of unsatisfiedexpectation--the feeling that "everything is just the same, so why did Ihurry?"--Nicholas began to settle down in his old home world. His fatherand mother were much the same, only a little older. What was new in themwas a certain uneasiness and occasional discord, which there used not tobe, and which, as Nicholas soon found out, was due to the bad state oftheir affairs. Sonya was nearly twenty; she had stopped growing prettierand promised nothing more than she was already, but that was enough. Sheexhaled happiness and love from the time Nicholas returned, and thefaithful, unalterable love of this girl had a gladdening effect on him.Petya and Natasha surprised Nicholas most. Petya was a big handsome boyof thirteen, merry, witty, and mischievous, with a voice that wasalready breaking. As for Natasha, for a long while Nicholas wondered andlaughed whenever he looked at her."You're not the same at all," he said."How? Am I uglier?""On the contrary, but what dignity? A princess!" he whispered to her."Yes, yes, yes!" cried Natasha, joyfully.She told him about her romance with Prince Andrew and of his visit toOtradnoe and showed him his last letter."Well, are you glad?" Natasha asked. "I am so tranquil and happy now.""Very glad," answered Nicholas. "He is an excellent fellow.... And areyou very much in love?""How shall I put it?" replied Natasha. "I was in love with Boris, withmy teacher, and with Denisov, but this is quite different. I feel atpeace and settled. I know that no better man than he exists, and I amcalm and contented now. Not at all as before."Nicholas expressed his disapproval of the postponement of the marriagefor a year; but Natasha attacked her brother with exasperation, provingto him that it could not be otherwise, and that it would be a bad thingto enter a family against the father's will, and that she herself wishedit so."You don't at all understand," she said.Nicholas was silent and agreed with her.Her brother often wondered as he looked at her. She did not seem at alllike a girl in love and parted from her affianced husband. She was even-tempered and calm and quite as cheerful as of old. This amazed Nicholasand even made him regard Bolkonski's courtship skeptically. He could notbelieve that her fate was sealed, especially as he had not seen her withPrince Andrew. It always seemed to him that there was something notquite right about this intended marriage."Why this delay? Why no betrothal?" he thought. Once, when he hadtouched on this topic with his mother, he discovered, to his surpriseand somewhat to his satisfaction, that in the depth of her soul she toohad doubts about this marriage."You see he writes," said she, showing her son a letter of PrinceAndrew's, with that latent grudge a mother always has in regard to adaughter's future married happiness, "he writes that he won't comebefore December. What can be keeping him? Illness, probably! His healthis very delicate. Don't tell Natasha. And don't attach importance to herbeing so bright: that's because she's living through the last days ofher girlhood, but I know what she is like every time we receive a letterfrom him! However, God grant that everything turns out well!" (Shealways ended with these words.) "He is an excellent man!"CHAPTER IIAfter reaching home Nicholas was at first serious and even dull. He wasworried by the impending necessity of interfering in the stupid businessmatters for which his mother had called him home. To throw off thisburden as quickly as possible, on the third day after his arrival hewent, angry and scowling and without answering questions as to where hewas going, to Mitenka's lodge and demanded an account of everything. Butwhat an account of everything might be Nicholas knew even less than thefrightened and bewildered Mitenka. The conversation and the examinationof the accounts with Mitenka did not last long. The village elder, apeasant delegate, and the village clerk, who were waiting in thepassage, heard with fear and delight first the young count's voiceroaring and snapping and rising louder and louder, and then words ofabuse, dreadful words, ejaculated one after the other."Robber!... Ungrateful wretch!... I'll hack the dog to pieces! I'm notmy father!... Robbing us!..." and so on.Then with no less fear and delight they saw how the young count, red inthe face and with bloodshot eyes, dragged Mitenka out by the scruff ofthe neck and applied his foot and knee to his behind with great agilityat convenient moments between the words, shouting, "Be off! Never let mesee your face here again, you villain!"Mitenka flew headlong down the six steps and ran away into theshrubbery. (This shrubbery was a well-known haven of refuge for culpritsat Otradnoe. Mitenka himself, returning tipsy from the town, used tohide there, and many of the residents at Otradnoe, hiding from Mitenka,knew of its protective qualities.)Mitenka's wife and sisters-in-law thrust their heads and frightenedfaces out of the door of a room where a bright samovar was boiling andwhere the steward's high bedstead stood with its patchwork quilt.The young count paid no heed to them, but, breathing hard, passed bywith resolute strides and went into the house.The countess, who heard at once from the maids what had happened at thelodge, was calmed by the thought that now their affairs would certainlyimprove, but on the other hand felt anxious as to the effect thisexcitement might have on her son. She went several times to his door ontiptoe and listened, as he lighted one pipe after another.Next day the old count called his son aside and, with an embarrassedsmile, said to him:"But you know, my dear boy, it's a pity you got excited! Mitenka hastold me all about it.""I knew," thought Nicholas, "that I should never understand anything inthis crazy world.""You were angry that he had not entered those 700 rubles. But they werecarried forward--and you did not look at the other page.""Papa, he is a blackguard and a thief! I know he is! And what I havedone, I have done; but, if you like, I won't speak to him again.""No, my dear boy" (the count, too, felt embarrassed. He knew he hadmismanaged his wife's property and was to blame toward his children, buthe did not know how to remedy it). "No, I beg you to attend to thebusiness. I am old. I...""No, Papa. Forgive me if I have caused you unpleasantness. I understandit all less than you do.""Devil take all these peasants, and money matters, and carryings forwardfrom page to page," he thought. "I used to understand what a 'corner'and the stakes at cards meant, but carrying forward to another page Idon't understand at all," said he to himself, and after that he did notmeddle in business affairs. But once the countess called her son andinformed him that she had a promissory note from Anna Mikhaylovna fortwo thousand rubles, and asked him what he thought of doing with it."This," answered Nicholas. "You say it rests with me. Well, I don't likeAnna Mikhaylovna and I don't like Boris, but they were our friends andpoor. Well then, this!" and he tore up the note, and by so doing causedthe old countess to weep tears of joy. After that, young Rostov took nofurther part in any business affairs, but devoted himself withpassionate enthusiasm to what was to him a new pursuit--the chase--forwhich his father kept a large establishment.CHAPTER IIIThe weather was already growing wintry and morning frosts congealed anearth saturated by autumn rains. The verdure had thickened and itsbright green stood out sharply against the brownish strips of winter ryetrodden down by the cattle, and against the pale-yellow stubble of thespring buckwheat. The wooded ravines and the copses, which at the end ofAugust had still been green islands amid black fields and stubble, hadbecome golden and bright-red islands amid the green winter rye. Thehares had already half changed their summer coats, the fox cubs werebeginning to scatter, and the young wolves were bigger than dogs. It wasthe best time of the year for the chase. The hounds of that ardent youngsportsman Rostov had not merely reached hard winter condition, but wereso jaded that at a meeting of the huntsmen it was decided to give them athree days' rest and then, on the sixteenth of September, to go on adistant expedition, starting from the oak grove where there was anundisturbed litter of wolf cubs.All that day the hounds remained at home. It was frosty and the air wassharp, but toward evening the sky became overcast and it began to thaw.On the fifteenth, when young Rostov, in his dressing gown, looked out ofthe window, he saw it was an unsurpassable morning for hunting: it wasas if the sky were melting and sinking to the earth without any wind.The only motion in the air was that of the dripping, microscopicparticles of drizzling mist. The bare twigs in the garden were hung withtransparent drops which fell on the freshly fallen leaves. The earth inthe kitchen garden looked wet and black and glistened like poppy seedand at a short distance merged into the dull, moist veil of mist.Nicholas went out into the wet and muddy porch. There was a smell ofdecaying leaves and of dog. Milka, a black-spotted, broad-haunched bitchwith prominent black eyes, got up on seeing her master, stretched herhind legs, lay down like a hare, and then suddenly jumped up and lickedhim right on his nose and mustache. Another borzoi, a dog, catchingsight of his master from the garden path, arched his back and, rushingheadlong toward the porch with lifted tail, began rubbing himselfagainst his legs."O-hoy!" came at that moment, that inimitable huntsman's call whichunites the deepest bass with the shrillest tenor, and round the cornercame Daniel the head huntsman and head kennelman, a gray, wrinkled oldman with hair cut straight over his forehead, Ukrainian fashion, a longbent whip in his hand, and that look of independence and scorn ofeverything that is only seen in huntsmen. He doffed his Circassian capto his master and looked at him scornfully. This scorn was not offensiveto his master. Nicholas knew that this Daniel, disdainful of everybodyand who considered himself above them, was all the same his serf andhuntsman."Daniel!" Nicholas said timidly, conscious at the sight of the weather,the hounds, and the huntsman that he was being carried away by thatirresistible passion for sport which makes a man forget all his previousresolutions, as a lover forgets in the presence of his mistress."What orders, your excellency?" said the huntsman in his deep bass, deepas a proto-deacon's and hoarse with hallooing--and two flashing blackeyes gazed from under his brows at his master, who was silent. "Can youresist it?" those eyes seemed to be asking."It's a good day, eh? For a hunt and a gallop, eh?" asked Nicholas,scratching Milka behind the ears.Daniel did not answer, but winked instead."I sent Uvarka at dawn to listen," his bass boomed out after a minute'spause. "He says she's moved them into the Otradnoe enclosure. They werehowling there." (This meant that the she-wolf, about whom they bothknew, had moved with her cubs to the Otradnoe copse, a small place amile and a half from the house.)"We ought to go, don't you think so?" said Nicholas. "Come to me withUvarka.""As you please.""Then put off feeding them.""Yes, sir."Five minutes later Daniel and Uvarka were standing in Nicholas' bigstudy. Though Daniel was not a big man, to see him in a room was likeseeing a horse or a bear on the floor among the furniture andsurroundings of human life. Daniel himself felt this, and as usual stoodjust inside the door, trying to speak softly and not move, for fear ofbreaking something in the master's apartment, and he hastened to say allthat was necessary so as to get from under that ceiling, out into theopen under the sky once more.Having finished his inquiries and extorted from Daniel an opinion thatthe hounds were fit (Daniel himself wished to go hunting), Nicholasordered the horses to be saddled. But just as Daniel was about to goNatasha came in with rapid steps, not having done up her hair orfinished dressing and with her old nurse's big shawl wrapped round her.Petya ran in at the same time."You are going?" asked Natasha. "I knew you would! Sonya said youwouldn't go, but I knew that today is the sort of day when you couldn'thelp going.""Yes, we are going," replied Nicholas reluctantly, for today, as heintended to hunt seriously, he did not want to take Natasha and Petya."We are going, but only wolf hunting: it would be dull for you.""You know it is my greatest pleasure," said Natasha. "It's not fair; youare going by yourself, are having the horses saddled and said nothing tous about it.""'No barrier bars a Russian's path'--we'll go!" shouted Petya."But you can't. Mamma said you mustn't," said Nicholas to Natasha."Yes, I'll go. I shall certainly go," said Natasha decisively. "Daniel,tell them to saddle for us, and Michael must come with my dogs," sheadded to the huntsman.It seemed to Daniel irksome and improper to be in a room at all, but tohave anything to do with a young lady seemed to him impossible. He castdown his eyes and hurried out as if it were none of his business,careful as he went not to inflict any accidental injury on the younglady.CHAPTER IVThe old count, who had always kept up an enormous hunting establishmentbut had now handed it all completely over to his son's care, being invery good spirits on this fifteenth of September, prepared to go outwith the others.In an hour's time the whole hunting party was at the porch. Nicholas,with a stern and serious air which showed that now was no time forattending to trifles, went past Natasha and Petya who were trying totell him something. He had a look at all the details of the hunt, sent apack of hounds and huntsmen on ahead to find the quarry, mounted hischestnut Donets, and whistling to his own leash of borzois, set offacross the threshing ground to a field leading to the Otradnoe wood. Theold count's horse, a sorrel gelding called Viflyanka, was led by thegroom in attendance on him, while the count himself was to drive in asmall trap straight to a spot reserved for him.They were taking fifty-four hounds, with six hunt attendants andwhippers-in. Besides the family, there were eight borzoi kennelmen andmore than forty borzois, so that, with the borzois on the leashbelonging to members of the family, there were about a hundred andthirty dogs and twenty horsemen.Each dog knew its master and its call. Each man in the hunt knew hisbusiness, his place, what he had to do. As soon as they had passed thefence they all spread out evenly and quietly, without noise or talk,along the road and field leading to the Otradnoe covert.The horses stepped over the field as over a thick carpet, now and thensplashing into puddles as they crossed a road. The misty sky stillseemed to descend evenly and imperceptibly toward the earth, the air wasstill, warm, and silent. Occasionally the whistle of a huntsman, thesnort of a horse, the crack of a whip, or the whine of a stragglinghound could be heard.When they had gone a little less than a mile, five more riders with dogsappeared out of the mist, approaching the Rostovs. In front rode afresh-looking, handsome old man with a large gray mustache."Good morning, Uncle!" said Nicholas, when the old man drew near."That's it. Come on!... I was sure of it," began "Uncle." (He was adistant relative of the Rostovs', a man of small means, and theirneighbor.) "I knew you wouldn't be able to resist it and it's a goodthing you're going. That's it! Come on!" (This was "Uncle's" favoriteexpression.) "Take the covert at once, for my Girchik says the Ilaginsare at Korniki with their hounds. That's it. Come on!... They'll takethe cubs from under your very nose.""That's where I'm going. Shall we join up our packs?" asked Nicholas.The hounds were joined into one pack, and "Uncle" and Nicholas rode onside by side. Natasha, muffled up in shawls which did not hide her eagerface and shining eyes, galloped up to them. She was followed by Petyawho always kept close to her, by Michael, a huntsman, and by a groomappointed to look after her. Petya, who was laughing, whipped and pulledat his horse. Natasha sat easily and confidently on her black Arabchikand reined him in without effort with a firm hand."Uncle" looked round disapprovingly at Petya and Natasha. He did notlike to combine frivolity with the serious business of hunting."Good morning, Uncle! We are going too!" shouted Petya."Good morning, good morning! But don't go overriding the hounds," said"Uncle" sternly."Nicholas, what a fine dog Trunila is! He knew me," said Natasha,referring to her favorite hound."In the first place, Trunila is not a 'dog,' but a harrier," thoughtNicholas, and looked sternly at his sister, trying to make her feel thedistance that ought to separate them at that moment. Natasha understoodit."You mustn't think we'll be in anyone's way, Uncle," she said. "We'll goto our places and won't budge.""A good thing too, little countess," said "Uncle," "only mind you don'tfall off your horse," he added, "because--that's it, come on!--you'venothing to hold on to."The oasis of the Otradnoe covert came in sight a few hundred yards off,the huntsmen were already nearing it. Rostov, having finally settledwith "Uncle" where they should set on the hounds, and having shownNatasha where she was to stand--a spot where nothing could possibly runout--went round above the ravine."Well, nephew, you're going for a big wolf," said "Uncle." "Mind anddon't let her slip!""That's as may happen," answered Rostov. "Karay, here!" he shouted,answering "Uncle's" remark by this call to his borzoi. Karay was ashaggy old dog with a hanging jowl, famous for having tackled a big wolfunaided. They all took up their places.The old count, knowing his son's ardor in the hunt, hurried so as not tobe late, and the huntsmen had not yet reached their places when CountIlya Rostov, cheerful, flushed, and with quivering cheeks, drove up withhis black horses over the winter rye to the place reserved for him,where a wolf might come out. Having straightened his coat and fastenedon his hunting knives and horn, he mounted his good, sleek, well-fed,and comfortable horse, Viflyanka, which was turning gray, like himself.His horses and trap were sent home. Count Ilya Rostov, though not atheart a keen sportsman, knew the rules of the hunt well, and rode to thebushy edge of the road where he was to stand, arranged his reins,settled himself in the saddle, and, feeling that he was ready, lookedabout with a smile.Beside him was Simon Chekmar, his personal attendant, an old horsemannow somewhat stiff in the saddle. Chekmar held in leash three formidablewolfhounds, who had, however, grown fat like their master and his horse.Two wise old dogs lay down unleashed. Some hundred paces farther alongthe edge of the wood stood Mitka, the count's other groom, a daringhorseman and keen rider to hounds. Before the hunt, by old custom, thecount had drunk a silver cupful of mulled brandy, taken a snack, andwashed it down with half a bottle of his favorite Bordeaux.He was somewhat flushed with the wine and the drive. His eyes wererather moist and glittered more than usual, and as he sat in his saddle,wrapped up in his fur coat, he looked like a child taken out for anouting.The thin, hollow-cheeked Chekmar, having got everything ready, keptglancing at his master with whom he had lived on the best of terms forthirty years, and understanding the mood he was in expected a pleasantchat. A third person rode up circumspectly through the wood (it wasplain that he had had a lesson) and stopped behind the count. Thisperson was a gray-bearded old man in a woman's cloak, with a tall peakedcap on his head. He was the buffoon, who went by a woman's name,Nastasya Ivanovna."Well, Nastasya Ivanovna!" whispered the count, winking at him. "If youscare away the beast, Daniel'll give it you!""I know a thing or two myself!" said Nastasya Ivanovna."Hush!" whispered the count and turned to Simon. "Have you seen theyoung countess?" he asked. "Where is she?""With young Count Peter, by the Zharov rank grass," answered Simon,smiling. "Though she's a lady, she's very fond of hunting.""And you're surprised at the way she rides, Simon, eh?" said the count."She's as good as many a man!""Of course! It's marvelous. So bold, so easy!""And Nicholas? Where is he? By the Lyadov upland, isn't he?""Yes, sir. He knows where to stand. He understands the matter so wellthat Daniel and I are often quite astounded," said Simon, well knowingwhat would please his master."Rides well, eh? And how well he looks on his horse, eh?""A perfect picture! How he chased a fox out of the rank grass by theZavarzinsk thicket the other day! Leaped a fearful place; what a sightwhen they rushed from the covert... the horse worth a thousand rublesand the rider beyond all price! Yes, one would have to search far tofind another as smart.""To search far..." repeated the count, evidently sorry Simon had notsaid more. "To search far," he said, turning back the skirt of his coatto get at his snuffbox."The other day when he came out from Mass in full uniform, MichaelSidorych..." Simon did not finish, for on the still air he haddistinctly caught the music of the hunt with only two or three houndsgiving tongue. He bent down his head and listened, shaking a warningfinger at his master. "They are on the scent of the cubs..." hewhispered, "straight to the Lyadov uplands."The count, forgetting to smooth out the smile on his face, looked intothe distance straight before him, down the narrow open space, holdingthe snuffbox in his hand but not taking any. After the cry of the houndscame the deep tones of the wolf call from Daniel's hunting horn; thepack joined the first three hounds and they could be heard in full cry,with that peculiar lift in the note that indicates that they are after awolf. The whippers-in no longer set on the hounds, but changed to thecry of ulyulyu, and above the others rose Daniel's voice, now a deepbass, now piercingly shrill. His voice seemed to fill the whole wood andcarried far beyond out into the open field.After listening a few moments in silence, the count and his attendantconvinced themselves that the hounds had separated into two packs: thesound of the larger pack, eagerly giving tongue, began to die away inthe distance, the other pack rushed by the wood past the count, and itwas with this that Daniel's voice was heard calling ulyulyu. The soundsof both packs mingled and broke apart again, but both were becoming moredistant.Simon sighed and stooped to straighten the leash a young borzoi hadentangled; the count too sighed and, noticing the snuffbox in his hand,opened it and took a pinch. "Back!" cried Simon to a borzoi that waspushing forward out of the wood. The count started and dropped thesnuffbox. Nastasya Ivanovna dismounted to pick it up. The count andSimon were looking at him.Then, unexpectedly, as often happens, the sound of the hunt suddenlyapproached, as if the hounds in full cry and Daniel ulyulyuing were justin front of them.The count turned and saw on his right Mitka staring at him with eyesstarting out of his head, raising his cap and pointing before him to theother side."Look out!" he shouted, in a voice plainly showing that he had longfretted to utter that word, and letting the borzois slip he gallopedtoward the count.The count and Simon galloped out of the wood and saw on their left awolf which, softly swaying from side to side, was coming at a quiet lopefarther to the left to the very place where they were standing. Theangry borzois whined and getting free of the leash rushed past thehorses' feet at the wolf.The wolf paused, turned its heavy forehead toward the dogs awkwardly,like a man suffering from the quinsy, and, still slightly swaying fromside to side, gave a couple of leaps and with a swish of its taildisappeared into the skirt of the wood. At the same instant, with a crylike a wail, first one hound, then another, and then another, spranghelter-skelter from the wood opposite and the whole pack rushed acrossthe field toward the very spot where the wolf had disappeared. The hazelbushes parted behind the hounds and Daniel's chestnut horse appeared,dark with sweat. On its long back sat Daniel, hunched forward, capless,his disheveled gray hair hanging over his flushed, perspiring face."Ulyulyulyu! ulyulyu!..." he cried. When he caught sight of the counthis eyes flashed lightning."Blast you!" he shouted, holding up his whip threateningly at the count."You've let the wolf go!... What sportsmen!" and as if scorning to saymore to the frightened and shamefaced count, he lashed the heavingflanks of his sweating chestnut gelding with all the anger the count hadaroused and flew off after the hounds. The count, like a punishedschoolboy, looked round, trying by a smile to win Simon's sympathy forhis plight. But Simon was no longer there. He was galloping round by thebushes while the field was coming up on both sides, all trying to headthe wolf, but it vanished into the wood before they could do so.CHAPTER VNicholas Rostov meanwhile remained at his post, waiting for the wolf. Bythe way the hunt approached and receded, by the cries of the dogs whosenotes were familiar to him, by the way the voices of the huntsmenapproached, receded, and rose, he realized what was happening at thecopse. He knew that young and old wolves were there, that the hounds hadseparated into two packs, that somewhere a wolf was being chased, andthat something had gone wrong. He expected the wolf to come his way anymoment. He made thousands of different conjectures as to where and fromwhat side the beast would come and how he would set upon it. Hopealternated with despair. Several times he addressed a prayer to God thatthe wolf should come his way. He prayed with that passionate andshamefaced feeling with which men pray at moments of great excitementarising from trivial causes. "What would it be to Thee to do this forme?" he said to God. "I know Thou art great, and that it is a sin to askthis of Thee, but for God's sake do let the old wolf come my way and letKaray spring at it--in sight of 'Uncle' who is watching from over there--and seize it by the throat in a death grip!" A thousand times duringthat half-hour Rostov cast eager and restless glances over the edge ofthe wood, with the two scraggy oaks rising above the aspen undergrowthand the gully with its water-worn side and "Uncle's" cap just visibleabove the bush on his right."No, I shan't have such luck," thought Rostov, "yet what wouldn't it beworth! It is not to be! Everywhere, at cards and in war, I am alwaysunlucky." Memories of Austerlitz and of Dolokhov flashed rapidly andclearly through his mind. "Only once in my life to get an old wolf, Iwant only that!" thought he, straining eyes and ears and looking to theleft and then to the right and listening to the slightest variation ofnote in the cries of the dogs.Again he looked to the right and saw something running toward him acrossthe deserted field. "No, it can't be!" thought Rostov, taking a deepbreath, as a man does at the coming of something long hoped for. Theheight of happiness was reached--and so simply, without warning, ornoise, or display, that Rostov could not believe his eyes and remainedin doubt for over a second. The wolf ran forward and jumped heavily overa gully that lay in her path. She was an old animal with a gray back andbig reddish belly. She ran without hurry, evidently feeling sure that noone saw her. Rostov, holding his breath, looked round at the borzois.They stood or lay not seeing the wolf or understanding the situation.Old Karay had turned his head and was angrily searching for fleas,baring his yellow teeth and snapping at his hind legs."Ulyulyulyu!" whispered Rostov, pouting his lips. The borzois jumped up,jerking the rings of the leashes and pricking their ears. Karay finishedscratching his hindquarters and, cocking his ears, got up with quiveringtail from which tufts of matted hair hung down."Shall I loose them or not?" Nicholas asked himself as the wolfapproached him coming from the copse. Suddenly the wolf's wholephysiognomy changed: she shuddered, seeing what she had probably neverseen before--human eyes fixed upon her--and turning her head a littletoward Rostov, she paused."Back or forward? Eh, no matter, forward..." the wolf seemed to say toherself, and she moved forward without again looking round and with aquiet, long, easy yet resolute lope."Ulyulyu!" cried Nicholas, in a voice not his own, and of its own accordhis good horse darted headlong downhill, leaping over gullies to headoff the wolf, and the borzois passed it, running faster still. Nicholasdid not hear his own cry nor feel that he was galloping, nor see theborzois, nor the ground over which he went: he saw only the wolf, who,increasing her speed, bounded on in the same direction along the hollow.The first to come into view was Milka, with her black markings andpowerful quarters, gaining upon the wolf. Nearer and nearer... now shewas ahead of it; but the wolf turned its head to face her, and insteadof putting on speed as she usually did Milka suddenly raised her tailand stiffened her forelegs."Ulyulyulyulyu!" shouted Nicholas.The reddish Lyubim rushed forward from behind Milka, sprang impetuouslyat the wolf, and seized it by its hindquarters, but immediately jumpedaside in terror. The wolf crouched, gnashed her teeth, and again roseand bounded forward, followed at the distance of a couple of feet by allthe borzois, who did not get any closer to her."She'll get away! No, it's impossible!" thought Nicholas, still shoutingwith a hoarse voice."Karay, ulyulyu!..." he shouted, looking round for the old borzoi whowas now his only hope. Karay, with all the strength age had left him,stretched himself to the utmost and, watching the wolf, galloped heavilyaside to intercept it. But the quickness of the wolf's lope and theborzoi's slower pace made it plain that Karay had miscalculated.Nicholas could already see not far in front of him the wood where thewolf would certainly escape should she reach it. But, coming toward him,he saw hounds and a huntsman galloping almost straight at the wolf.There was still hope. A long, yellowish young borzoi, one Nicholas didnot know, from another leash, rushed impetuously at the wolf from infront and almost knocked her over. But the wolf jumped up more quicklythan anyone could have expected and, gnashing her teeth, flew at theyellowish borzoi, which, with a piercing yelp, fell with its head on theground, bleeding from a gash in its side."Karay? Old fellow!..." wailed Nicholas.Thanks to the delay caused by this crossing of the wolf's path, the olddog with its felted hair hanging from its thigh was within five paces ofit. As if aware of her danger, the wolf turned her eyes on Karay, tuckedher tail yet further between her legs, and increased her speed. But hereNicholas only saw that something happened to Karay--the borzoi wassuddenly on the wolf, and they rolled together down into a gully just infront of them.That instant, when Nicholas saw the wolf struggling in the gully withthe dogs, while from under them could be seen her gray hair andoutstretched hind leg and her frightened choking head, with her earslaid back (Karay was pinning her by the throat), was the happiest momentof his life. With his hand on his saddlebow, he was ready to dismountand stab the wolf, when she suddenly thrust her head up from among thatmass of dogs, and then her forepaws were on the edge of the gully. Sheclicked her teeth (Karay no longer had her by the throat), leaped with amovement of her hind legs out of the gully, and having disengagedherself from the dogs, with tail tucked in again, went forward. Karay,his hair bristling, and probably bruised or wounded, climbed withdifficulty out of the gully."Oh my God! Why?" Nicholas cried in despair."Uncle's" huntsman was galloping from the other side across the wolf'spath and his borzois once more stopped the animal's advance. She wasagain hemmed in.Nicholas and his attendant, with "Uncle" and his huntsman, were allriding round the wolf, crying "ulyulyu!" shouting and preparing todismount each moment that the wolf crouched back, and starting forwardagain every time she shook herself and moved toward the wood where shewould be safe.Already, at the beginning of this chase, Daniel, hearing the ulyulyuing,had rushed out from the wood. He saw Karay seize the wolf, and checkedhis horse, supposing the affair to be over. But when he saw that thehorsemen did not dismount and that the wolf shook herself and ran forsafety, Daniel set his chestnut galloping, not at the wolf but straighttoward the wood, just as Karay had run to cut the animal off. As aresult of this, he galloped up to the wolf just when she had beenstopped a second time by "Uncle's" borzois.Daniel galloped up silently, holding a naked dagger in his left hand andthrashing the laboring sides of his chestnut horse with his whip as ifit were a flail.Nicholas neither saw nor heard Daniel until the chestnut, breathingheavily, panted past him, and he heard the fall of a body and saw Daniellying on the wolf's back among the dogs, trying to seize her by theears. It was evident to the dogs, the hunters, and to the wolf herselfthat all was now over. The terrified wolf pressed back her ears andtried to rise, but the borzois stuck to her. Daniel rose a little, tooka step, and with his whole weight, as if lying down to rest, fell on thewolf, seizing her by the ears. Nicholas was about to stab her, butDaniel whispered, "Don't! We'll gag her!" and, changing his position,set his foot on the wolf's neck. A stick was thrust between her jaws andshe was fastened with a leash, as if bridled, her legs were boundtogether, and Daniel rolled her over once or twice from side to side.With happy, exhausted faces, they laid the old wolf, alive, on a shyingand snorting horse and, accompanied by the dogs yelping at her, took herto the place where they were all to meet. The hounds had killed two ofthe cubs and the borzois three. The huntsmen assembled with their bootyand their stories, and all came to look at the wolf, which, with herbroad-browed head hanging down and the bitten stick between her jaws,gazed with great glassy eyes at this crowd of dogs and men surroundingher. When she was touched, she jerked her bound legs and looked wildlyyet simply at everybody. Old Count Rostov also rode up and touched thewolf."Oh, what a formidable one!" said he. "A formidable one, eh?" he askedDaniel, who was standing near."Yes, your excellency," answered Daniel, quickly doffing his cap.The count remembered the wolf he had let slip and his encounter withDaniel."Ah, but you are a crusty fellow, friend!" said the count.For sole reply Daniel gave him a shy, childlike, meek, and amiablesmile.CHAPTER VIThe old count went home, and Natasha and Petya promised to return verysoon, but as it was still early the hunt went farther. At midday theyput the hounds into a ravine thickly overgrown with young trees.Nicholas standing in a fallow field could see all his whips.Facing him lay a field of winter rye, there his own huntsman stood alonein a hollow behind a hazel bush. The hounds had scarcely been loosedbefore Nicholas heard one he knew, Voltorn, giving tongue at intervals;other hounds joined in, now pausing and now again giving tongue. Amoment later he heard a cry from the wooded ravine that a fox had beenfound, and the whole pack, joining together, rushed along the ravinetoward the ryefield and away from Nicholas.He saw the whips in their red caps galloping along the edge of theravine, he even saw the hounds, and was expecting a fox to show itselfat any moment on the ryefield opposite.The huntsman standing in the hollow moved and loosed his borzois, andNicholas saw a queer, short-legged red fox with a fine brush going hardacross the field. The borzois bore down on it.... Now they drew close tothe fox which began to dodge between the field in sharper and sharpercurves, trailing its brush, when suddenly a strange white borzoi dashedin followed by a black one, and everything was in confusion; the borzoisformed a star-shaped figure, scarcely swaying their bodies and withtails turned away from the center of the group. Two huntsmen galloped upto the dogs; one in a red cap, the other, a stranger, in a green coat."What's this?" thought Nicholas. "Where's that huntsman from? He is not'Uncle's' man."The huntsmen got the fox, but stayed there a long time without strappingit to the saddle. Their horses, bridled and with high saddles, stoodnear them and there too the dogs were lying. The huntsmen waved theirarms and did something to the fox. Then from that spot came the sound ofa horn, with the signal agreed on in case of a fight."That's Ilagin's huntsman having a row with our Ivan," said Nicholas'groom.Nicholas sent the man to call Natasha and Petya to him, and rode at afootpace to the place where the whips were getting the hounds together.Several of the field galloped to the spot where the fight was going on.Nicholas dismounted, and with Natasha and Petya, who had ridden up,stopped near the hounds, waiting to see how the matter would end. Out ofthe bushes came the huntsman who had been fighting and rode toward hisyoung master, with the fox tied to his crupper. While still at adistance he took off his cap and tried to speak respectfully, but he waspale and breathless and his face was angry. One of his eyes was black,but he probably was not even aware of it."What has happened?" asked Nicholas."A likely thing, killing a fox our dogs had hunted! And it was my graybitch that caught it! Go to law, indeed!... He snatches at the fox! Igave him one with the fox. Here it is on my saddle! Do you want a tasteof this?..." said the huntsman, pointing to his dagger and probablyimagining himself still speaking to his foe.Nicholas, not stopping to talk to the man, asked his sister and Petya towait for him and rode to the spot where the enemy's, Ilagin's, huntingparty was.The victorious huntsman rode off to join the field, and there,surrounded by inquiring sympathizers, recounted his exploits.The facts were that Ilagin, with whom the Rostovs had a quarrel and wereat law, hunted over places that belonged by custom to the Rostovs, andhad now, as if purposely, sent his men to the very woods the Rostovswere hunting and let his man snatch a fox their dogs had chased.Nicholas, though he had never seen Ilagin, with his usual absence ofmoderation in judgment, hated him cordially from reports of hisarbitrariness and violence, and regarded him as his bitterest foe. Herode in angry agitation toward him, firmly grasping his whip and fullyprepared to take the most resolute and desperate steps to punish hisenemy.Hardly had he passed an angle of the wood before a stout gentleman in abeaver cap came riding toward him on a handsome raven-black horse,accompanied by two hunt servants.Instead of an enemy, Nicholas found in Ilagin a stately and courteousgentleman who was particularly anxious to make the young count'sacquaintance. Having ridden up to Nicholas, Ilagin raised his beaver capand said he much regretted what had occurred and would have the manpunished who had allowed himself to seize a fox hunted by someone else'sborzois. He hoped to become better acquainted with the count and invitedhim to draw his covert.Natasha, afraid that her brother would do something dreadful, hadfollowed him in some excitement. Seeing the enemies exchanging friendlygreetings, she rode up to them. Ilagin lifted his beaver cap stillhigher to Natasha and said, with a pleasant smile, that the youngcountess resembled Diana in her passion for the chase as well as in herbeauty, of which he had heard much.To expiate his huntsman's offense, Ilagin pressed the Rostovs to come toan upland of his about a mile away which he usually kept for himself andwhich, he said, swarmed with hares. Nicholas agreed, and the hunt, nowdoubled, moved on.The way to Iligin's upland was across the fields. The hunt servants fellinto line. The masters rode together. "Uncle," Rostov, and Ilagin keptstealthily glancing at one another's dogs, trying not to be observed bytheir companions and searching uneasily for rivals to their own borzois.Rostov was particularly struck by the beauty of a small, pure-bred, red-spotted bitch on Ilagin's leash, slender but with muscles like steel, adelicate muzzle, and prominent black eyes. He had heard of the swiftnessof Ilagin's borzois, and in that beautiful bitch saw a rival to his ownMilka.In the middle of a sober conversation begun by Ilagin about the year'sharvest, Nicholas pointed to the red-spotted bitch."A fine little bitch, that!" said he in a careless tone. "Is she swift?""That one? Yes, she's a good dog, gets what she's after," answeredIlagin indifferently, of the red-spotted bitch Erza, for which, a yearbefore, he had given a neighbor three families of house serfs. "So inyour parts, too, the harvest is nothing to boast of, Count?" he went on,continuing the conversation they had begun. And considering it polite toreturn the young count's compliment, Ilagin looked at his borzois andpicked out Milka who attracted his attention by her breadth. "Thatblack-spotted one of yours is fine--well shaped!" said he."Yes, she's fast enough," replied Nicholas, and thought: "If only afull-grown hare would cross the field now I'd show you what sort ofborzoi she is," and turning to his groom, he said he would give a rubleto anyone who found a hare."I don't understand," continued Ilagin, "how some sportsmen can be sojealous about game and dogs. For myself, I can tell you, Count, I enjoyriding in company such as this... what could be better?" (he againraised his cap to Natasha) "but as for counting skins and what onetakes, I don't care about that.""Of course not!""Or being upset because someone else's borzoi and not mine catchessomething. All I care about is to enjoy seeing the chase, is it not so,Count? For I consider that...""A-tu!" came the long-drawn cry of one of the borzoi whippers-in, whohad halted. He stood on a knoll in the stubble, holding his whip aloft,and again repeated his long-drawn cry, "A-tu!" (This call and theuplifted whip meant that he saw a sitting hare.)"Ah, he has found one, I think," said Ilagin carelessly. "Yes, we mustride up.... Shall we both course it?" answered Nicholas, seeing in Erzaand "Uncle's" red Rugay two rivals he had never yet had a chance ofpitting against his own borzois. "And suppose they outdo my Milka atonce!" he thought as he rode with "Uncle" and Ilagin toward the hare."A full-grown one?" asked Ilagin as he approached the whip who hadsighted the hare--and not without agitation he looked round and whistledto Erza."And you, Michael Nikanorovich?" he said, addressing "Uncle."The latter was riding with a sullen expression on his face."How can I join in? Why, you've given a village for each of yourborzois! That's it, come on! Yours are worth thousands. Try yoursagainst one another, you two, and I'll look on!""Rugay, hey, hey!" he shouted. "Rugayushka!" he added, involuntarily bythis diminutive expressing his affection and the hopes he placed on thisred borzoi. Natasha saw and felt the agitation the two elderly men andher brother were trying to conceal, and was herself excited by it.The huntsman stood halfway up the knoll holding up his whip and thegentlefolk rode up to him at a footpace; the hounds that were far off onthe horizon turned away from the hare, and the whips, but not thegentlefolk, also moved away. All were moving slowly and sedately."How is it pointing?" asked Nicholas, riding a hundred paces toward thewhip who had sighted the hare.But before the whip could reply, the hare, scenting the frost comingnext morning, was unable to rest and leaped up. The pack on leash rusheddownhill in full cry after the hare, and from all sides the borzois thatwere not on leash darted after the hounds and the hare. All the hunt,who had been moving slowly, shouted, "Stop!" calling in the hounds,while the borzoi whips, with a cry of "A-tu!" galloped across the fieldsetting the borzois on the hare. The tranquil Ilagin, Nicholas, Natasha,and "Uncle" flew, reckless of where and how they went, seeing only theborzois and the hare and fearing only to lose sight even for an instantof the chase. The hare they had started was a strong and swift one. Whenhe jumped up he did not run at once, but pricked his ears listening tothe shouting and trampling that resounded from all sides at once. Hetook a dozen bounds, not very quickly, letting the borzois gain on him,and, finally having chosen his direction and realized his danger, laidback his ears and rushed off headlong. He had been lying in the stubble,but in front of him was the autumn sowing where the ground was soft. Thetwo borzois of the huntsman who had sighted him, having been thenearest, were the first to see and pursue him, but they had not gone farbefore Ilagin's red-spotted Erza passed them, got within a length, flewat the hare with terrible swiftness aiming at his scut, and, thinkingshe had seized him, rolled over like a ball. The hare arched his backand bounded off yet more swiftly. From behind Erza rushed the broad-haunched, black-spotted Milka and began rapidly gaining on the hare."Milashka, dear!" rose Nicholas' triumphant cry. It looked as if Milkawould immediately pounce on the hare, but she overtook him and flewpast. The hare had squatted. Again the beautiful Erza reached him, butwhen close to the hare's scut paused as if measuring the distance, so asnot to make a mistake this time but seize his hind leg."Erza, darling!" Ilagin wailed in a voice unlike his own. Erza did nothearken to his appeal. At the very moment when she would have seized herprey, the hare moved and darted along the balk between the winter ryeand the stubble. Again Erza and Milka were abreast, running like a pairof carriage horses, and began to overtake the hare, but it was easierfor the hare to run on the balk and the borzois did not overtake him soquickly."Rugay, Rugayushka! That's it, come on!" came a third voice just then,and "Uncle's" red borzoi, straining and curving its back, caught up withthe two foremost borzois, pushed ahead of them regardless of theterrible strain, put on speed close to the hare, knocked it off the balkonto the ryefield, again put on speed still more viciously, sinking tohis knees in the muddy field, and all one could see was how, muddyinghis back, he rolled over with the hare. A ring of borzois surroundedhim. A moment later everyone had drawn up round the crowd of dogs. Onlythe delighted "Uncle" dismounted, and cut off a pad, shaking the harefor the blood to drip off, and anxiously glancing round with restlesseyes while his arms and legs twitched. He spoke without himself knowingwhom to or what about. "That's it, come on! That's a dog!... There, ithas beaten them all, the thousand-ruble as well as the one-rubleborzois. That's it, come on!" said he, panting and looking wrathfullyaround as if he were abusing someone, as if they were all his enemiesand had insulted him, and only now had he at last succeeded injustifying himself. "There are your thousand-ruble ones.... That's it,come on!...""Rugay, here's a pad for you!" he said, throwing down the hare's muddypad. "You've deserved it, that's it, come on!""She'd tired herself out, she'd run it down three times by herself,"said Nicholas, also not listening to anyone and regardless of whether hewere heard or not."But what is there in running across it like that?" said Ilagin's groom."Once she had missed it and turned it away, any mongrel could take it,"Ilagin was saying at the same time, breathless from his gallop and hisexcitement. At the same moment Natasha, without drawing breath, screamedjoyously, ecstatically, and so piercingly that it set everyone's eartingling. By that shriek she expressed what the others expressed by alltalking at once, and it was so strange that she must herself have beenashamed of so wild a cry and everyone else would have been amazed at itat any other time. "Uncle" himself twisted up the hare, threw it neatlyand smartly across his horse's back as if by that gesture he meant torebuke everybody, and, with an air of not wishing to speak to anyone,mounted his bay and rode off. The others all followed, dispirited andshamefaced, and only much later were they able to regain their formeraffectation of indifference. For a long time they continued to look atred Rugay who, his arched back spattered with mud and clanking the ringof his leash, walked along just behind "Uncle's" horse with the sereneair of a conqueror."Well, I am like any other dog as long as it's not a question ofcoursing. But when it is, then look out!" his appearance seemed toNicholas to be saying.When, much later, "Uncle" rode up to Nicholas and began talking to him,he felt flattered that, after what had happened, "Uncle" deigned tospeak to him.CHAPTER VIIToward evening Ilagin took leave of Nicholas, who found that they wereso far from home that he accepted "Uncle's" offer that the hunting partyshould spend the night in his little village of Mikhaylovna."And if you put up at my house that will be better still. That's it,come on!" said "Uncle." "You see it's damp weather, and you could rest,and the little countess could be driven home in a trap.""Uncle's" offer was accepted. A huntsman was sent to Otradnoe for atrap, while Nicholas rode with Natasha and Petya to "Uncle's" house.Some five male domestic serfs, big and little, rushed out to the frontporch to meet their master. A score of women serfs, old and young, aswell as children, popped out from the back entrance to have a look atthe hunters who were arriving. The presence of Natasha--a woman, a lady,and on horseback--raised the curiosity of the serfs to such a degreethat many of them came up to her, stared her in the face, and unabashedby her presence made remarks about her as though she were some prodigyon show and not a human being able to hear or understand what was saidabout her."Arinka! Look, she sits sideways! There she sits and her skirtdangles.... See, she's got a little hunting horn!""Goodness gracious! See her knife?...""Isn't she a Tartar!""How is it you didn't go head over heels?" asked the boldest of all,addressing Natasha directly."Uncle" dismounted at the porch of his little wooden house which stoodin the midst of an overgrown garden and, after a glance at hisretainers, shouted authoritatively that the superfluous ones should takethemselves off and that all necessary preparations should be made toreceive the guests and the visitors.The serfs all dispersed. "Uncle" lifted Natasha off her horse and takingher hand led her up the rickety wooden steps of the porch. The house,with its bare, unplastered log walls, was not overclean--it did not seemthat those living in it aimed at keeping it spotless--but neither was itnoticeably neglected. In the entry there was a smell of fresh apples,and wolf and fox skins hung about."Uncle" led the visitors through the anteroom into a small hall with afolding table and red chairs, then into the drawing room with a roundbirchwood table and a sofa, and finally into his private room wherethere was a tattered sofa, a worn carpet, and portraits of Suvorov, ofthe host's father and mother, and of himself in military uniform. Thestudy smelt strongly of tobacco and dogs. "Uncle" asked his visitors tosit down and make themselves at home, and then went out of the room.Rugay, his back still muddy, came into the room and lay down on thesofa, cleaning himself with his tongue and teeth. Leading from the studywas a passage in which a partition with ragged curtains could be seen.From behind this came women's laughter and whispers. Natasha, Nicholas,and Petya took off their wraps and sat down on the sofa. Petya, leaningon his elbow, fell asleep at once. Natasha and Nicholas were silent.Their faces glowed, they were hungry and very cheerful. They looked atone another (now that the hunt was over and they were in the house,Nicholas no longer considered it necessary to show his manly superiorityover his sister), Natasha gave him a wink, and neither refrained longfrom bursting into a peal of ringing laughter even before they had apretext ready to account for it.After a while "Uncle" came in, in a Cossack coat, blue trousers, andsmall top boots. And Natasha felt that this costume, the very one shehad regarded with surprise and amusement at Otradnoe, was just the rightthing and not at all worse than a swallow-tail or frock coat. "Uncle"too was in high spirits and far from being offended by the brother's andsister's laughter (it could never enter his head that they might belaughing at his way of life) he himself joined in the merriment."That's right, young countess, that's it, come on! I never saw anyonelike her!" said he, offering Nicholas a pipe with a long stem and, witha practiced motion of three fingers, taking down another that had beencut short. "She's ridden all day like a man, and is as fresh as ever!"Soon after "Uncle's" reappearance the door was opened, evidently fromthe sound by a barefooted girl, and a stout, rosy, good-looking woman ofabout forty, with a double chin and full red lips, entered carrying alarge loaded tray. With hospitable dignity and cordiality in her glanceand in every motion, she looked at the visitors and, with a pleasantsmile, bowed respectfully. In spite of her exceptional stoutness, whichcaused her to protrude her chest and stomach and throw back her head,this woman (who was "Uncle's" housekeeper) trod very lightly. She wentto the table, set down the tray, and with her plump white hands deftlytook from it the bottles and various hors d'oeuvres and dishes andarranged them on the table. When she had finished, she stepped aside andstopped at the door with a smile on her face. "Here I am. I am she! Nowdo you understand 'Uncle'?" her expression said to Rostov. How could onehelp understanding? Not only Nicholas, but even Natasha understood themeaning of his puckered brow and the happy complacent smile thatslightly puckered his lips when Anisya Fedorovna entered. On the traywas a bottle of herb wine, different kinds of vodka, pickled mushrooms,rye cakes made with buttermilk, honey in the comb, still mead andsparkling mead, apples, nuts (raw and roasted), and nut-and-honeysweets. Afterwards she brought a freshly roasted chicken, ham, preservesmade with honey, and preserves made with sugar.All this was the fruit of Anisya Fedorovna's housekeeping, gathered andprepared by her. The smell and taste of it all had a smack of AnisyaFedorovna herself: a savor of juiciness, cleanliness, whiteness, andpleasant smiles."Take this, little Lady-Countess!" she kept saying, as she offeredNatasha first one thing and then another.Natasha ate of everything and thought she had never seen or eaten suchbuttermilk cakes, such aromatic jam, such honey-and-nut sweets, or sucha chicken anywhere. Anisya Fedorovna left the room.After supper, over their cherry brandy, Rostov and "Uncle" talked ofpast and future hunts, of Rugay and Ilagin's dogs, while Natasha satupright on the sofa and listened with sparkling eyes. She tried severaltimes to wake Petya that he might eat something, but he only mutteredincoherent words without waking up. Natasha felt so lighthearted andhappy in these novel surroundings that she only feared the trap wouldcome for her too soon. After a casual pause, such as often occurs whenreceiving friends for the first time in one's own house, "Uncle,"answering a thought that was in his visitors' mind, said:"This, you see, is how I am finishing my days... Death will come. That'sit, come on! Nothing will remain. Then why harm anyone?""Uncle's" face was very significant and even handsome as he said this.Involuntarily Rostov recalled all the good he had heard about him fromhis father and the neighbors. Throughout the whole province "Uncle" hadthe reputation of being the most honorable and disinterested of cranks.They called him in to decide family disputes, chose him as executor,confided secrets to him, elected him to be a justice and to other posts;but he always persistently refused public appointments, passing theautumn and spring in the fields on his bay gelding, sitting at home inwinter, and lying in his overgrown garden in summer."Why don't you enter the service, Uncle?""I did once, but gave it up. I am not fit for it. That's it, come on! Ican't make head or tail of it. That's for you--I haven't brains enough.Now, hunting is another matter--that's it, come on! Open the door,there!" he shouted. "Why have you shut it?"The door at the end of the passage led to the huntsmen's room, as theycalled the room for the hunt servants.There was a rapid patter of bare feet, and an unseen hand opened thedoor into the huntsmen's room, from which came the clear sounds of abalalayka on which someone, who was evidently a master of the art, wasplaying. Natasha had been listening to those strains for some time andnow went out into the passage to hear better."That's Mitka, my coachman.... I have got him a good balalayka. I'm fondof it," said "Uncle."It was the custom for Mitka to play the balalayka in the huntsmen's roomwhen "Uncle" returned from the chase. "Uncle" was fond of such music."How good! Really very good!" said Nicholas with some unintentionalsuperciliousness, as if ashamed to confess that the sounds pleased himvery much."Very good?" said Natasha reproachfully, noticing her brother's tone."Not 'very good' it's simply delicious!"Just as "Uncle's" pickled mushrooms, honey, and cherry brandy had seemedto her the best in the world, so also that song, at that moment, seemedto her the acme of musical delight."More, please, more!" cried Natasha at the door as soon as the balalaykaceased. Mitka tuned up afresh, and recommenced thrumming the balalaykato the air of My Lady, with trills and variations. "Uncle" satlistening, slightly smiling, with his head on one side. The air wasrepeated a hundred times. The balalayka was retuned several times andthe same notes were thrummed again, but the listeners did not grow wearyof it and wished to hear it again and again. Anisya Fedorovna came inand leaned her portly person against the doorpost."You like listening?" she said to Natasha, with a smile extremely like"Uncle's." "That's a good player of ours," she added."He doesn't play that part right!" said "Uncle" suddenly, with anenergetic gesture. "Here he ought to burst out--that's it, come on!--ought to burst out.""Do you play then?" asked Natasha."Uncle" did not answer, but smiled."Anisya, go and see if the strings of my guitar are all right. I haven'ttouched it for a long time. That's it--come on! I've given it up."Anisya Fedorovna, with her light step, willingly went to fulfill hererrand and brought back the guitar.Without looking at anyone, "Uncle" blew the dust off it and, tapping thecase with his bony fingers, tuned the guitar and settled himself in hisarmchair. He took the guitar a little above the fingerboard, arching hisleft elbow with a somewhat theatrical gesture, and, with a wink atAnisya Fedorovna, struck a single chord, pure and sonorous, and thenquietly, smoothly, and confidently began playing in very slow time, notMy Lady, but the well-known song: Came a maiden down the street. Thetune, played with precision and in exact time, began to thrill in thehearts of Nicholas and Natasha, arousing in them the same kind of sobermirth as radiated from Anisya Fedorovna's whole being. Anisya Fedorovnaflushed, and drawing her kerchief over her face went laughing out of theroom. "Uncle" continued to play correctly, carefully, with energeticfirmness, looking with a changed and inspired expression at the spotwhere Anisya Fedorovna had just stood. Something seemed to be laughing alittle on one side of his face under his gray mustaches, especially asthe song grew brisker and the time quicker and when, here and there, ashe ran his fingers over the strings, something seemed to snap."Lovely, lovely! Go on, Uncle, go on!" shouted Natasha as soon as he hadfinished. She jumped up and hugged and kissed him. "Nicholas, Nicholas!"she said, turning to her brother, as if asking him: "What is it moves meso?"Nicholas too was greatly pleased by "Uncle's" playing, and "Uncle"played the piece over again. Anisya Fedorovna's smiling face reappearedin the doorway and behind hers other faces...Fetching water clear and sweet, Stop, dear maiden, I entreat--played "Uncle" once more, running his fingers skillfully over thestrings, and then he stopped short and jerked his shoulders."Go on, Uncle dear," Natasha wailed in an imploring tone as if her lifedepended on it."Uncle" rose, and it was as if there were two men in him: one of themsmiled seriously at the merry fellow, while the merry fellow struck anaive and precise attitude preparatory to a folk dance."Now then, niece!" he exclaimed, waving to Natasha the hand that hadjust struck a chord.Natasha threw off the shawl from her shoulders, ran forward to face"Uncle," and setting her arms akimbo also made a motion with hershoulders and struck an attitude.Where, how, and when had this young countess, educated by an emigreeFrench governess, imbibed from the Russian air she breathed that spiritand obtained that manner which the pas de chale * would, one would havesupposed, long ago have effaced? But the spirit and the movements werethose inimitable and unteachable Russian ones that "Uncle" had expectedof her. As soon as she had struck her pose, and smiled triumphantly,proudly, and with sly merriment, the fear that had at first seizedNicholas and the others that she might not do the right thing was at anend, and they were already admiring her.* The French shawl dance.She did the right thing with such precision, such complete precision,that Anisya Fedorovna, who had at once handed her the handkerchief sheneeded for the dance, had tears in her eyes, though she laughed as shewatched this slim, graceful countess, reared in silks and velvets and sodifferent from herself, who yet was able to understand all that was inAnisya and in Anisya's father and mother and aunt, and in every Russianman and woman."Well, little countess; that's it--come on!" cried "Uncle," with ajoyous laugh, having finished the dance. "Well done, niece! Now a fineyoung fellow must be found as husband for you. That's it--come on!""He's chosen already," said Nicholas smiling."Oh?" said "Uncle" in surprise, looking inquiringly at Natasha, whonodded her head with a happy smile."And such a one!" she said. But as soon as she had said it a new trainof thoughts and feelings arose in her. "What did Nicholas' smile meanwhen he said 'chosen already'? Is he glad of it or not? It is as if hethought my Bolkonski would not approve of or understand our gaiety. Buthe would understand it all. Where is he now?" she thought, and her facesuddenly became serious. But this lasted only a second. "Don't dare tothink about it," she said to herself, and sat down again smilinglybeside "Uncle," begging him to play something more."Uncle" played another song and a valse; then after a pause he clearedhis throat and sang his favorite hunting song:As 'twas growing dark last night Fell the snow so soft and light..."Uncle" sang as peasants sing, with full and naive conviction that thewhole meaning of a song lies in the words and that the tune comes ofitself, and that apart from the words there is no tune, which existsonly to give measure to the words. As a result of this the unconsideredtune, like the song of a bird, was extraordinarily good. Natasha was inecstasies over "Uncle's" singing. She resolved to give up learning theharp and to play only the guitar. She asked "Uncle" for his guitar andat once found the chords of the song.After nine o'clock two traps and three mounted men, who had been sent tolook for them, arrived to fetch Natasha and Petya. The count andcountess did not know where they were and were very anxious, said one ofthe men.Petya was carried out like a log and laid in the larger of the twotraps. Natasha and Nicholas got into the other. "Uncle" wrapped Natashaup warmly and took leave of her with quite a new tenderness. Heaccompanied them on foot as far as the bridge that could not be crossed,so that they had to go round by the ford, and he sent huntsmen to ridein front with lanterns."Good-bye, dear niece," his voice called out of the darkness--not thevoice Natasha had known previously, but the one that had sung As 'twasgrowing dark last night.In the village through which they passed there were red lights and acheerful smell of smoke."What a darling Uncle is!" said Natasha, when they had come out onto thehighroad."Yes," returned Nicholas. "You're not cold?""No. I'm quite, quite all right. I feel so comfortable!" answeredNatasha, almost perplexed by her feelings. They remained silent a longwhile. The night was dark and damp. They could not see the horses, butonly heard them splashing through the unseen mud.What was passing in that receptive childlike soul that so eagerly caughtand assimilated all the diverse impressions of life? How did they allfind place in her? But she was very happy. As they were nearing home shesuddenly struck up the air of As 'twas growing dark last night--the tuneof which she had all the way been trying to get and had at last caught."Got it?" said Nicholas."What were you thinking about just now, Nicholas?" inquired Natasha.They were fond of asking one another that question."I?" said Nicholas, trying to remember. "Well, you see, first I thoughtthat Rugay, the red hound, was like Uncle, and that if he were a man hewould always keep Uncle near him, if not for his riding, then for hismanner. What a good fellow Uncle is! Don't you think so?... Well, andyou?""I? Wait a bit, wait.... Yes, first I thought that we are driving alongand imagining that we are going home, but that heaven knows where we arereally going in the darkness, and that we shall arrive and suddenly findthat we are not in Otradnoe, but in Fairyland. And then I thought... No,nothing else.""I know, I expect you thought of him," said Nicholas, smiling as Natashaknew by the sound of his voice."No," said Natasha, though she had in reality been thinking about PrinceAndrew at the same time as of the rest, and of how he would have liked"Uncle." "And then I was saying to myself all the way, 'How well Anisyacarried herself, how well!'" And Nicholas heard her spontaneous, happy,ringing laughter. "And do you know," she suddenly said, "I know that Ishall never again be as happy and tranquil as I am now.""Rubbish, nonsense, humbug!" exclaimed Nicholas, and he thought: "Howcharming this Natasha of mine is! I have no other friend like her andnever shall have. Why should she marry? We might always drive abouttogether!""What a darling this Nicholas of mine is!" thought Natasha."Ah, there are still lights in the drawing-room!" she said, pointing tothe windows of the house that gleamed invitingly in the moist velvetydarkness of the night.CHAPTER VIIICount Ilya Rostov had resigned the position of Marshal of the Nobilitybecause it involved him in too much expense, but still his affairs didnot improve. Natasha and Nicholas often noticed their parents conferringtogether anxiously and privately and heard suggestions of selling thefine ancestral Rostov house and estate near Moscow. It was not necessaryto entertain so freely as when the count had been Marshal, and life atOtradnoe was quieter than in former years, but still the enormous houseand its lodges were full of people and more than twenty sat down totable every day. These were all their own people who had settled down inthe house almost as members of the family, or persons who were, itseemed, obliged to live in the count's house. Such were Dimmler themusician and his wife, Vogel the dancing master and his family, Belova,an old maiden lady, an inmate of the house, and many others such asPetya's tutors, the girls' former governess, and other people who simplyfound it preferable and more advantageous to live in the count's housethan at home. They had not as many visitors as before, but the oldhabits of life without which the count and countess could not conceiveof existence remained unchanged. There was still the huntingestablishment which Nicholas had even enlarged, the same fifty horsesand fifteen grooms in the stables, the same expensive presents anddinner parties to the whole district on name days; there were still thecount's games of whist and boston, at which--spreading out his cards sothat everybody could see them--he let himself be plundered of hundredsof rubles every day by his neighbors, who looked upon an opportunity toplay a rubber with Count Rostov as a most profitable source of income.The count moved in his affairs as in a huge net, trying not to believethat he was entangled but becoming more and more so at every step, andfeeling too feeble to break the meshes or to set to work carefully andpatiently to disentangle them. The countess, with her loving heart, feltthat her children were being ruined, that it was not the count's faultfor he could not help being what he was--that (though he tried to hideit) he himself suffered from the consciousness of his own and hischildren's ruin, and she tried to find means of remedying the position.From her feminine point of view she could see only one solution, namely,for Nicholas to marry a rich heiress. She felt this to be their lasthope and that if Nicholas refused the match she had found for him, shewould have to abandon the hope of ever getting matters right. This matchwas with Julie Karagina, the daughter of excellent and virtuous parents,a girl the Rostovs had known from childhood, and who had now become awealthy heiress through the death of the last of her brothers.The countess had written direct to Julie's mother in Moscow suggesting amarriage between their children and had received a favorable answer fromher. Karagina had replied that for her part she was agreeable, andeverything depend on her daughter's inclination. She invited Nicholas tocome to Moscow.Several times the countess, with tears in her eyes, told her son thatnow both her daughters were settled, her only wish was to see himmarried. She said she could lie down in her grave peacefully if thatwere accomplished. Then she told him that she knew of a splendid girland tried to discover what he thought about marriage.At other times she praised Julie to him and advised him to go to Moscowduring the holidays to amuse himself. Nicholas guessed what his mother'sremarks were leading to and during one of these conversations inducedher to speak quite frankly. She told him that her only hope of gettingtheir affairs disentangled now lay in his marrying Julie Karagina."But, Mamma, suppose I loved a girl who has no fortune, would you expectme to sacrifice my feelings and my honor for the sake of money?" heasked his mother, not realizing the cruelty of his question and onlywishing to show his noble-mindedness."No, you have not understood me," said his mother, not knowing how tojustify herself. "You have not understood me, Nikolenka. It is yourhappiness I wish for," she added, feeling that she was telling anuntruth and was becoming entangled. She began to cry."Mamma, don't cry! Only tell me that you wish it, and you know I willgive my life, anything, to put you at ease," said Nicholas. "I wouldsacrifice anything for you--even my feelings."But the countess did not want the question put like that: she did notwant a sacrifice from her son, she herself wished to make a sacrificefor him."No, you have not understood me, don't let us talk about it," shereplied, wiping away her tears."Maybe I do love a poor girl," said Nicholas to himself. "Am I tosacrifice my feelings and my honor for money? I wonder how Mamma couldspeak so to me. Because Sonya is poor I must not love her," he thought,"must not respond to her faithful, devoted love? Yet I should certainlybe happier with her than with some doll-like Julie. I can alwayssacrifice my feelings for my family's welfare," he said to himself, "butI can't coerce my feelings. If I love Sonya, that feeling is for mestronger and higher than all else."Nicholas did not go to Moscow, and the countess did not renew theconversation with him about marriage. She saw with sorrow, and sometimeswith exasperation, symptoms of a growing attachment between her son andthe portionless Sonya. Though she blamed herself for it, she could notrefrain from grumbling at and worrying Sonya, often pulling her upwithout reason, addressing her stiffly as "my dear," and using theformal "you" instead of the intimate "thou" in speaking to her. Thekindhearted countess was the more vexed with Sonya because that poor,dark-eyed niece of hers was so meek, so kind, so devotedly grateful toher benefactors, and so faithfully, unchangingly, and unselfishly inlove with Nicholas, that there were no grounds for finding fault withher.Nicholas was spending the last of his leave at home. A fourth letter hadcome from Prince Andrew, from Rome, in which he wrote that he would havebeen on his way back to Russia long ago had not his wound unexpectedlyreopened in the warm climate, which obliged him to defer his return tillthe beginning of the new year. Natasha was still as much in love withher betrothed, found the same comfort in that love, and was still asready to throw herself into all the pleasures of life as before; but atthe end of the fourth month of their separation she began to have fitsof depression which she could not master. She felt sorry for herself:sorry that she was being wasted all this time and of no use to anyone--while she felt herself so capable of loving and being loved.Things were not cheerful in the Rostovs' home.CHAPTER IXChristmas came and except for the ceremonial Mass, the solemn andwearisome Christmas congratulations from neighbors and servants, and thenew dresses everyone put on, there were no special festivities, thoughthe calm frost of twenty degrees Reaumur, the dazzling sunshine by day,and the starlight of the winter nights seemed to call for some specialcelebration of the season.On the third day of Christmas week, after the midday dinner, all theinmates of the house dispersed to various rooms. It was the dullest timeof the day. Nicholas, who had been visiting some neighbors that morning,was asleep on the sitting-room sofa. The old count was resting in hisstudy. Sonya sat in the drawing room at the round table, copying adesign for embroidery. The countess was playing patience. NastasyaIvanovna the buffoon sat with a sad face at the window with two oldladies. Natasha came into the room, went up to Sonya, glanced at whatshe was doing, and then went up to her mother and stood withoutspeaking."Why are you wandering about like an outcast?" asked her mother. "Whatdo you want?""Him... I want him... now, this minute! I want him!" said Natasha, withglittering eyes and no sign of a smile.The countess lifted her head and looked attentively at her daughter."Don't look at me, Mamma! Don't look; I shall cry directly.""Sit down with me a little," said the countess."Mamma, I want him. Why should I be wasted like this, Mamma?"Her voice broke, tears gushed from her eyes, and she turned quickly tohide them and left the room.She passed into the sitting room, stood there thinking awhile, and thenwent into the maids' room. There an old maidservant was grumbling at ayoung girl who stood panting, having just run in through the cold fromthe serfs' quarters."Stop playing--there's a time for everything," said the old woman."Let her alone, Kondratevna," said Natasha. "Go, Mavrushka, go."Having released Mavrushka, Natasha crossed the dancing hall and went tothe vestibule. There an old footman and two young ones were playingcards. They broke off and rose as she entered."What can I do with them?" thought Natasha."Oh, Nikita, please go... where can I send him?... Yes, go to the yardand fetch a fowl, please, a cock, and you, Misha, bring me some oats.""Just a few oats?" said Misha, cheerfully and readily."Go, go quickly," the old man urged him."And you, Theodore, get me a piece of chalk."On her way past the butler's pantry she told them to set a samovar,though it was not at all the time for tea.Foka, the butler, was the most ill-tempered person in the house. Natashaliked to test her power over him. He distrusted the order and askedwhether the samovar was really wanted."Oh dear, what a young lady!" said Foka, pretending to frown at Natasha.No one in the house sent people about or gave them as much trouble asNatasha did. She could not see people unconcernedly, but had to sendthem on some errand. She seemed to be trying whether any of them wouldget angry or sulky with her; but the serfs fulfilled no one's orders soreadily as they did hers. "What can I do, where can I go?" thought she,as she went slowly along the passage."Nastasya Ivanovna, what sort of children shall I have?" she asked thebuffoon, who was coming toward her in a woman's jacket."Why, fleas, crickets, grasshoppers," answered the buffoon."O Lord, O Lord, it's always the same! Oh, where am I to go? What am Ito do with myself?" And tapping with her heels, she ran quickly upstairsto see Vogel and his wife who lived on the upper story.Two governesses were sitting with the Vogels at a table, on which wereplates of raisins, walnuts, and almonds. The governesses were discussingwhether it was cheaper to live in Moscow or Odessa. Natasha sat down,listened to their talk with a serious and thoughtful air, and then gotup again."The island of Madagascar," she said, "Ma-da-gas-car," she repeated,articulating each syllable distinctly, and, not replying to MadameSchoss who asked her what she was saying, she went out of the room.Her brother Petya was upstairs too; with the man in attendance on him hewas preparing fireworks to let off that night."Petya! Petya!" she called to him. "Carry me downstairs."Petya ran up and offered her his back. She jumped on it, putting herarms round his neck, and he pranced along with her."No, don't... the island of Madagascar!" she said, and jumping off hisback she went downstairs.Having as it were reviewed her kingdom, tested her power, and made surethat everyone was submissive, but that all the same it was dull, Natashabetook herself to the ballroom, picked up her guitar, sat down in a darkcorner behind a bookcase, and began to run her fingers over the stringsin the bass, picking out a passage she recalled from an opera she hadheard in Petersburg with Prince Andrew. What she drew from the guitarwould have had no meaning for other listeners, but in her imagination awhole series of reminiscences arose from those sounds. She sat behindthe bookcase with her eyes fixed on a streak of light escaping from thepantry door and listened to herself and pondered. She was in a mood forbrooding on the past.Sonya passed to the pantry with a glass in her hand. Natasha glanced ather and at the crack in the pantry door, and it seemed to her that sheremembered the light falling through that crack once before and Sonyapassing with a glass in her hand. "Yes it was exactly the same," thoughtNatasha."Sonya, what is this?" she cried, twanging a thick string."Oh, you are there!" said Sonya with a start, and came near andlistened. "I don't know. A storm?" she ventured timidly, afraid of beingwrong."There! That's just how she started and just how she came up smilingtimidly when all this happened before," thought Natasha, "and in justthe same way I thought there was something lacking in her.""No, it's the chorus from The Water-Carrier, listen!" and Natasha sangthe air of the chorus so that Sonya should catch it. "Where were yougoing?" she asked."To change the water in this glass. I am just finishing the design.""You always find something to do, but I can't," said Natasha. "Andwhere's Nicholas?""Asleep, I think.""Sonya, go and wake him," said Natasha. "Tell him I want him to come andsing."She sat awhile, wondering what the meaning of it all having happenedbefore could be, and without solving this problem, or at all regrettingnot having done so, she again passed in fancy to the time when she waswith him and he was looking at her with a lover's eyes."Oh, if only he would come quicker! I am so afraid it will never be!And, worst of all, I am growing old--that's the thing! There won't thenbe in me what there is now. But perhaps he'll come today, will comeimmediately. Perhaps he has come and is sitting in the drawing room.Perhaps he came yesterday and I have forgotten it." She rose, put downthe guitar, and went to the drawing room.All the domestic circle, tutors, governesses, and guests, were alreadyat the tea table. The servants stood round the table--but Prince Andrewwas not there and life was going on as before."Ah, here she is!" said the old count, when he saw Natasha enter. "Well,sit down by me." But Natasha stayed by her mother and glanced round asif looking for something."Mamma!" she muttered, "give him to me, give him, Mamma, quickly,quickly!" and she again had difficulty in repressing her sobs.She sat down at the table and listened to the conversation between theelders and Nicholas, who had also come to the table. "My God, my God!The same faces, the same talk, Papa holding his cup and blowing in thesame way!" thought Natasha, feeling with horror a sense of repulsionrising up in her for the whole household, because they were always thesame.After tea, Nicholas, Sonya, and Natasha went to the sitting room, totheir favorite corner where their most intimate talks always began.CHAPTER X"Does it ever happen to you," said Natasha to her brother, when theysettled down in the sitting room, "does it ever happen to you to feel asif there were nothing more to come--nothing; that everything good ispast? And to feel not exactly dull, but sad?""I should think so!" he replied. "I have felt like that when everythingwas all right and everyone was cheerful. The thought has come into mymind that I was already tired of it all, and that we must all die. Oncein the regiment I had not gone to some merrymaking where there wasmusic... and suddenly I felt so depressed...""Oh yes, I know, I know, I know!" Natasha interrupted him. "When I wasquite little that used to be so with me. Do you remember when I waspunished once about some plums? You were all dancing, and I sat sobbingin the schoolroom? I shall never forget it: I felt sad and sorry foreveryone, for myself, and for everyone. And I was innocent--that was thechief thing," said Natasha. "Do you remember?""I remember," answered Nicholas. "I remember that I came to youafterwards and wanted to comfort you, but do you know, I felt ashamedto. We were terribly absurd. I had a funny doll then and wanted to giveit to you. Do you remember?""And do you remember," Natasha asked with a pensive smile, "how once,long, long ago, when we were quite little, Uncle called us into thestudy--that was in the old house--and it was dark--we went in andsuddenly there stood...""A Negro," chimed in Nicholas with a smile of delight. "Of course Iremember. Even now I don't know whether there really was a Negro, or ifwe only dreamed it or were told about him.""He was gray, you remember, and had white teeth, and stood and looked atus...""Sonya, do you remember?" asked Nicholas."Yes, yes, I do remember something too," Sonya answered timidly."You know I have asked Papa and Mamma about that Negro," said Natasha,"and they say there was no Negro at all. But you see, you remember!""Of course I do, I remember his teeth as if I had just seen them.""How strange it is! It's as if it were a dream! I like that.""And do you remember how we rolled hard-boiled eggs in the ballroom, andsuddenly two old women began spinning round on the carpet? Was that realor not? Do you remember what fun it was?""Yes, and you remember how Papa in his blue overcoat fired a gun in theporch?"So they went through their memories, smiling with pleasure: not the sadmemories of old age, but poetic, youthful ones--those impressions ofone's most distant past in which dreams and realities blend--and theylaughed with quiet enjoyment.Sonya, as always, did not quite keep pace with them, though they sharedthe same reminiscences.Much that they remembered had slipped from her mind, and what sherecalled did not arouse the same poetic feeling as they experienced. Shesimply enjoyed their pleasure and tried to fit in with it.She only really took part when they recalled Sonya's first arrival. Shetold them how afraid she had been of Nicholas because he had on a cordedjacket and her nurse had told her that she, too, would be sewn up withcords."And I remember their telling me that you had been born under acabbage," said Natasha, "and I remember that I dared not disbelieve itthen, but knew that it was not true, and I felt so uncomfortable."While they were talking a maid thrust her head in at the other door ofthe sitting room."They have brought the cock, Miss," she said in a whisper."It isn't wanted, Petya. Tell them to take it away," replied Natasha.In the middle of their talk in the sitting room, Dimmler came in andwent up to the harp that stood there in a corner. He took off its clothcovering, and the harp gave out a jarring sound."Mr. Dimmler, please play my favorite nocturne by Field," came the oldcountess' voice from the drawing room.Dimmler struck a chord and, turning to Natasha, Nicholas, and Sonya,remarked: "How quiet you young people are!""Yes, we're philosophizing," said Natasha, glancing round for a momentand then continuing the conversation. They were now discussing dreams.Dimmler began to play; Natasha went on tiptoe noiselessly to the table,took up a candle, carried it out, and returned, seating herself quietlyin her former place. It was dark in the room especially where they weresitting on the sofa, but through the big windows the silvery light ofthe full moon fell on the floor. Dimmler had finished the piece butstill sat softly running his fingers over the strings, evidentlyuncertain whether to stop or to play something else."Do you know," said Natasha in a whisper, moving closer to Nicholas andSonya, "that when one goes on and on recalling memories, one at lastbegins to remember what happened before one was in the world...""That is metempsychosis," said Sonya, who had always learned well, andremembered everything. "The Egyptians believed that our souls have livedin animals, and will go back into animals again.""No, I don't believe we ever were in animals," said Natasha, still in awhisper though the music had ceased. "But I am certain that we wereangels somewhere there, and have been here, and that is why weremember....""May I join you?" said Dimmler who had come up quietly, and he sat downby them."If we have been angels, why have we fallen lower?" said Nicholas. "No,that can't be!""Not lower, who said we were lower?... How do I know what I was before?"Natasha rejoined with conviction. "The soul is immortal--well then, if Ishall always live I must have lived before, lived for a whole eternity.""Yes, but it is hard for us to imagine eternity," remarked Dimmler, whohad joined the young folk with a mildly condescending smile but nowspoke as quietly and seriously as they."Why is it hard to imagine eternity?" said Natasha. "It is now today,and it will be tomorrow, and always; and there was yesterday, and theday before...""Natasha! Now it's your turn. Sing me something," they heard thecountess say. "Why are you sitting there like conspirators?""Mamma, I don't at all want to," replied Natasha, but all the same sherose.None of them, not even the middle-aged Dimmler, wanted to break offtheir conversation and quit that corner in the sitting room, but Natashagot up and Nicholas sat down at the clavichord. Standing as usual in themiddle of the hall and choosing the place where the resonance was best,Natasha began to sing her mother's favorite song.She had said she did not want to sing, but it was long since she hadsung, and long before she again sang, as she did that evening. Thecount, from his study where he was talking to Mitenka, heard her and,like a schoolboy in a hurry to run out to play, blundered in his talkwhile giving orders to the steward, and at last stopped, while Mitenkastood in front of him also listening and smiling. Nicholas did not takehis eyes off his sister and drew breath in time with her. Sonya, as shelistened, thought of the immense difference there was between herselfand her friend, and how impossible it was for her to be anything like asbewitching as her cousin. The old countess sat with a blissful yet sadsmile and with tears in her eyes, occasionally shaking her head. Shethought of Natasha and of her own youth, and of how there was somethingunnatural and dreadful in this impending marriage of Natasha and PrinceAndrew.Dimmler, who had seated himself beside the countess, listened withclosed eyes."Ah, Countess," he said at last, "that's a European talent, she hasnothing to learn--what softness, tenderness, and strength....""Ah, how afraid I am for her, how afraid I am!" said the countess, notrealizing to whom she was speaking. Her maternal instinct told her thatNatasha had too much of something, and that because of this she wouldnot be happy. Before Natasha had finished singing, fourteen-year-oldPetya rushed in delightedly, to say that some mummers had arrived.Natasha stopped abruptly."Idiot!" she screamed at her brother and, running to a chair, threwherself on it, sobbing so violently that she could not stop for a longtime."It's nothing, Mamma, really it's nothing; only Petya startled me," shesaid, trying to smile, but her tears still flowed and sobs still chokedher.The mummers (some of the house serfs) dressed up as bears, Turks,innkeepers, and ladies--frightening and funny--bringing in with them thecold from outside and a feeling of gaiety, crowded, at first timidly,into the anteroom, then hiding behind one another they pushed into theballroom where, shyly at first and then more and more merrily andheartily, they started singing, dancing, and playing Christmas games.The countess, when she had identified them and laughed at theircostumes, went into the drawing room. The count sat in the ballroom,smiling radiantly and applauding the players. The young people haddisappeared.Half an hour later there appeared among the other mummers in theballroom an old lady in a hooped skirt--this was Nicholas. A Turkishgirl was Petya. A clown was Dimmler. An hussar was Natasha, and aCircassian was Sonya with burnt-cork mustache and eyebrows.After the condescending surprise, nonrecognition, and praise, from thosewho were not themselves dressed up, the young people decided that theircostumes were so good that they ought to be shown elsewhere.Nicholas, who, as the roads were in splendid condition, wanted to takethem all for a drive in his troyka, proposed to take with them about adozen of the serf mummers and drive to "Uncle's.""No, why disturb the old fellow?" said the countess. "Besides, youwouldn't have room to turn round there. If you must go, go to theMelyukovs'."Melyukova was a widow, who, with her family and their tutors andgovernesses, lived three miles from the Rostovs."That's right, my dear," chimed in the old count, thoroughly aroused."I'll dress up at once and go with them. I'll make Pashette open hereyes."But the countess would not agree to his going; he had had a bad leg allthese last days. It was decided that the count must not go, but that ifLouisa Ivanovna (Madame Schoss) would go with them, the young ladiesmight go to the Melyukovs', Sonya, generally so timid and shy, moreurgently than anyone begging Louisa Ivanovna not to refuse.Sonya's costume was the best of all. Her mustache and eyebrows wereextraordinarily becoming. Everyone told her she looked very handsome,and she was in a spirited and energetic mood unusual with her. Someinner voice told her that now or never her fate would be decided, and inher male attire she seemed quite a different person. Louisa Ivanovnaconsented to go, and in half an hour four troyka sleighs with large andsmall bells, their runners squeaking and whistling over the frozen snow,drove up to the porch.Natasha was foremost in setting a merry holiday tone, which, passingfrom one to another, grew stronger and reached its climax when they allcame out into the frost and got into the sleighs, talking, calling toone another, laughing, and shouting.Two of the troykas were the usual household sleighs, the third was theold count's with a trotter from the Orlov stud as shaft horse, thefourth was Nicholas' own with a short shaggy black shaft horse.Nicholas, in his old lady's dress over which he had belted his hussarovercoat, stood in the middle of the sleigh, reins in hand.It was so light that he could see the moonlight reflected from the metalharness disks and from the eyes of the horses, who looked round in alarmat the noisy party under the shadow of the porch roof.Natasha, Sonya, Madame Schoss, and two maids got into Nicholas' sleigh;Dimmler, his wife, and Petya, into the old count's, and the rest of themummers seated themselves in the other two sleighs."You go ahead, Zakhar!" shouted Nicholas to his father's coachman,wishing for a chance to race past him.The old count's troyka, with Dimmler and his party, started forward,squeaking on its runners as though freezing to the snow, its deep-tonedbell clanging. The side horses, pressing against the shafts of themiddle horse, sank in the snow, which was dry and glittered like sugar,and threw it up.Nicholas set off, following the first sleigh; behind him the othersmoved noisily, their runners squeaking. At first they drove at a steadytrot along the narrow road. While they drove past the garden the shadowsof the bare trees often fell across the road and hid the brilliantmoonlight, but as soon as they were past the fence, the snowy plainbathed in moonlight and motionless spread out before them glitteringlike diamonds and dappled with bluish shadows. Bang, bang! went thefirst sleigh over a cradle hole in the snow of the road, and each of theother sleighs jolted in the same way, and rudely breaking the frost-bound stillness, the troykas began to speed along the road, one afterthe other."A hare's track, a lot of tracks!" rang out Natasha's voice through thefrost-bound air."How light it is, Nicholas!" came Sonya's voice.Nicholas glanced round at Sonya, and bent down to see her face closer.Quite a new, sweet face with black eyebrows and mustaches peeped up athim from her sable furs--so close and yet so distant--in the moonlight."That used to be Sonya," thought he, and looked at her closer andsmiled."What is it, Nicholas?""Nothing," said he and turned again to the horses.When they came out onto the beaten highroad--polished by sleigh runnersand cut up by rough-shod hoofs, the marks of which were visible in themoonlight--the horses began to tug at the reins of their own accord andincreased their pace. The near side horse, arching his head and breakinginto a short canter, tugged at his traces. The shaft horse swayed fromside to side, moving his ears as if asking: "Isn't it time to beginnow?" In front, already far ahead the deep bell of the sleigh ringingfarther and farther off, the black horses driven by Zakhar could beclearly seen against the white snow. From that sleigh one could hear theshouts, laughter, and voices of the mummers."Gee up, my darlings!" shouted Nicholas, pulling the reins to one sideand flourishing the whip.It was only by the keener wind that met them and the jerks given by theside horses who pulled harder--ever increasing their gallop--that onenoticed how fast the troyka was flying. Nicholas looked back. Withscreams squeals, and waving of whips that caused even the shaft horsesto gallop--the other sleighs followed. The shaft horse swung steadilybeneath the bow over its head, with no thought of slackening pace andready to put on speed when required.Nicholas overtook the first sleigh. They were driving downhill andcoming out upon a broad trodden track across a meadow, near a river."Where are we?" thought he. "It's the Kosoy meadow, I suppose. But no--this is something new I've never seen before. This isn't the Kosoymeadow nor the Demkin hill, and heaven only knows what it is! It issomething new and enchanted. Well, whatever it may be..." And shoutingto his horses, he began to pass the first sleigh.Zakhar held back his horses and turned his face, which was alreadycovered with hoarfrost to his eyebrows.Nicholas gave the horses the rein, and Zakhar, stretching out his arms,clucked his tongue and let his horses go."Now, look out, master!" he cried.Faster still the two troykas flew side by side, and faster moved thefeet of the galloping side horses. Nicholas began to draw ahead. Zakhar,while still keeping his arms extended, raised one hand with the reins."No you won't, master!" he shouted.Nicholas put all his horses to a gallop and passed Zakhar. The horsesshowered the fine dry snow on the faces of those in the sleigh--besidethem sounded quick ringing bells and they caught confused glimpses ofswiftly moving legs and the shadows of the troyka they were passing. Thewhistling sound of the runners on the snow and the voices of girlsshrieking were heard from different sides.Again checking his horses, Nicholas looked around him. They were stillsurrounded by the magic plain bathed in moonlight and spangled withstars."Zakhar is shouting that I should turn to the left, but why to theleft?" thought Nicholas. "Are we getting to the Melyukovs'? Is thisMelyukovka? Heaven only knows where we are going, and heaven knows whatis happening to us--but it is very strange and pleasant whatever it is."And he looked round in the sleigh."Look, his mustache and eyelashes are all white!" said one of thestrange, pretty, unfamiliar people--the one with fine eyebrows andmustache."I think this used to be Natasha," thought Nicholas, "and that wasMadame Schoss, but perhaps it's not, and this Circassian with themustache I don't know, but I love her.""Aren't you cold?" he asked.They did not answer but began to laugh. Dimmler from the sleigh behindshouted something--probably something funny--but they could not make outwhat he said."Yes, yes!" some voices answered, laughing."But here was a fairy forest with black moving shadows, and a glitter ofdiamonds and a flight of marble steps and the silver roofs of fairybuildings and the shrill yells of some animals. And if this is reallyMelyukovka, it is still stranger that we drove heaven knows where andhave come to Melyukovka," thought Nicholas.It really was Melyukovka, and maids and footmen with merry faces camerunning, out to the porch carrying candles."Who is it?" asked someone in the porch."The mummers from the count's. I know by the horses," replied somevoices.CHAPTER XIPelageya Danilovna Melyukova, a broadly built, energetic woman wearingspectacles, sat in the drawing room in a loose dress, surrounded by herdaughters whom she was trying to keep from feeling dull. They werequietly dropping melted wax into snow and looking at the shadows the waxfigures would throw on the wall, when they heard the steps and voices ofnew arrivals in the vestibule.Hussars, ladies, witches, clowns, and bears, after clearing theirthroats and wiping the hoarfrost from their faces in the vestibule, cameinto the ballroom where candles were hurriedly lighted. The clown--Dimmler--and the lady--Nicholas--started a dance. Surrounded by thescreaming children the mummers, covering their faces and disguisingtheir voices, bowed to their hostess and arranged themselves about theroom."Dear me! there's no recognizing them! And Natasha! See whom she lookslike! She really reminds me of somebody. But Herr Dimmler--isn't hegood! I didn't know him! And how he dances. Dear me, there's aCircassian. Really, how becoming it is to dear Sonya. And who is that?Well, you have cheered us up! Nikita and Vanya--clear away the tables!And we were sitting so quietly. Ha, ha, ha!... The hussar, the hussar!Just like a boy! And the legs!... I can't look at him..." differentvoices were saying.Natasha, the young Melyukovs' favorite, disappeared with them into theback rooms where a cork and various dressing gowns and male garmentswere called for and received from the footman by bare girlish arms frombehind the door. Ten minutes later, all the young Melyukovs joined themummers.Pelageya Danilovna, having given orders to clear the rooms for thevisitors and arranged about refreshments for the gentry and the serfs,went about among the mummers without removing her spectacles, peeringinto their faces with a suppressed smile and failing to recognize any ofthem. It was not merely Dimmler and the Rostovs she failed to recognize,she did not even recognize her own daughters, or her late husband's,dressing gowns and uniforms, which they had put on."And who is this?" she asked her governess, peering into the face of herown daughter dressed up as a Kazan-Tartar. "I suppose it is one of theRostovs! Well, Mr. Hussar, and what regiment do you serve in?" she askedNatasha. "Here, hand some fruit jelly to the Turk!" she ordered thebutler who was handing things round. "That's not forbidden by his law."Sometimes, as she looked at the strange but amusing capers cut by thedancers, who--having decided once for all that being disguised, no onewould recognize them--were not at all shy, Pelageya Danilovna hid herface in her handkerchief, and her whole stout body shook withirrepressible, kindly, elderly laughter."My little Sasha! Look at Sasha!" she said.After Russian country dances and chorus dances, Pelageya Danilovna madethe serfs and gentry join in one large circle: a ring, a string, and asilver ruble were fetched and they all played games together.In an hour, all the costumes were crumpled and disordered. The corkedeyebrows and mustaches were smeared over the perspiring, flushed, andmerry faces. Pelageya Danilovna began to recognize the mummers, admiredtheir cleverly contrived costumes, and particularly how they suited theyoung ladies, and she thanked them all for having entertained her sowell. The visitors were invited to supper in the drawing room, and theserfs had something served to them in the ballroom."Now to tell one's fortune in the empty bathhouse is frightening!" saidan old maid who lived with the Melyukovs, during supper."Why?" said the eldest Melyukov girl."You wouldn't go, it takes courage...""I'll go," said Sonya."Tell what happened to the young lady!" said the second Melyukov girl."Well," began the old maid, "a young lady once went out, took a cock,laid the table for two, all properly, and sat down. After sitting awhile, she suddenly hears someone coming... a sleigh drives up withharness bells; she hears him coming! He comes in, just in the shape of aman, like an officer--comes in and sits down to table with her.""Ah! ah!" screamed Natasha, rolling her eyes with horror."Yes? And how... did he speak?""Yes, like a man. Everything quite all right, and he began persuadingher; and she should have kept him talking till cockcrow, but she gotfrightened, just got frightened and hid her face in her hands. Then hecaught her up. It was lucky the maids ran in just then...""Now, why frighten them?" said Pelageya Danilovna."Mamma, you used to try your fate yourself..." said her daughter."And how does one do it in a barn?" inquired Sonya."Well, say you went to the barn now, and listened. It depends on whatyou hear; hammering and knocking--that's bad; but a sound of shiftinggrain is good and one sometimes hears that, too.""Mamma, tell us what happened to you in the barn."Pelageya Danilovna smiled."Oh, I've forgotten..." she replied. "But none of you would go?""Yes, I will; Pelageya Danilovna, let me! I'll go," said Sonya."Well, why not, if you're not afraid?""Louisa Ivanovna, may I?" asked Sonya.Whether they were playing the ring and string game or the ruble game ortalking as now, Nicholas did not leave Sonya's side, and gazed at herwith quite new eyes. It seemed to him that it was only today, thanks tothat burnt-cork mustache, that he had fully learned to know her. Andreally, that evening, Sonya was brighter, more animated, and prettierthan Nicholas had ever seen her before."So that's what she is like; what a fool I have been!" he thought gazingat her sparkling eyes, and under the mustache a happy rapturous smiledimpled her cheeks, a smile he had never seen before."I'm not afraid of anything," said Sonya. "May I go at once?" She gotup.They told her where the barn was and how she should stand and listen,and they handed her a fur cloak. She threw this over her head andshoulders and glanced at Nicholas."What a darling that girl is!" thought he. "And what have I beenthinking of till now?"Sonya went out into the passage to go to the barn. Nicholas went hastilyto the front porch, saying he felt too hot. The crowd of people reallyhad made the house stuffy.Outside, there was the same cold stillness and the same moon, but evenbrighter than before. The light was so strong and the snow sparkled withso many stars that one did not wish to look up at the sky and the realstars were unnoticed. The sky was black and dreary, while the earth wasgay."I am a fool, a fool! what have I been waiting for?" thought Nicholas,and running out from the porch he went round the corner of the house andalong the path that led to the back porch. He knew Sonya would pass thatway. Halfway lay some snow-covered piles of firewood and across andalong them a network of shadows from the bare old lime trees fell on thesnow and on the path. This path led to the barn. The log walls of thebarn and its snow-covered roof, that looked as if hewn out of someprecious stone, sparkled in the moonlight. A tree in the garden snappedwith the frost, and then all was again perfectly silent. His bosomseemed to inhale not air but the strength of eternal youth and gladness.From the back porch came the sound of feet descending the steps, thebottom step upon which snow had fallen gave a ringing creak and he heardthe voice of an old maidservant saying, "Straight, straight, along thepath, Miss. Only, don't look back.""I am not afraid," answered Sonya's voice, and along the path towardNicholas came the crunching, whistling sound of Sonya's feet in her thinshoes.Sonya came along, wrapped in her cloak. She was only a couple of pacesaway when she saw him, and to her too he was not the Nicholas she hadknown and always slightly feared. He was in a woman's dress, withtousled hair and a happy smile new to Sonya. She ran rapidly toward him."Quite different and yet the same," thought Nicholas, looking at herface all lit up by the moonlight. He slipped his arms under the cloakthat covered her head, embraced her, pressed her to him, and kissed heron the lips that wore a mustache and had a smell of burnt cork. Sonyakissed him full on the lips, and disengaging her little hands pressedthem to his cheeks."Sonya!... Nicholas!"... was all they said. They ran to the barn andthen back again, re-entering, he by the front and she by the back porch.CHAPTER XIIWhen they all drove back from Pelageya Danilovna's, Natasha, who alwayssaw and noticed everything, arranged that she and Madame Schoss shouldgo back in the sleigh with Dimmler, and Sonya with Nicholas and themaids.On the way back Nicholas drove at a steady pace instead of racing andkept peering by that fantastic all-transforming light into Sonya's faceand searching beneath the eyebrows and mustache for his former and hispresent Sonya from whom he had resolved never to be parted again. Helooked and recognizing in her both the old and the new Sonya, and beingreminded by the smell of burnt cork of the sensation of her kiss,inhaled the frosty air with a full breast and, looking at the groundflying beneath him and at the sparkling sky, felt himself again infairyland."Sonya, is it well with thee?" he asked from time to time."Yes!" she replied. "And with thee?"When halfway home Nicholas handed the reins to the coachman and ran fora moment to Natasha's sleigh and stood on its wing."Natasha!" he whispered in French, "do you know I have made up my mindabout Sonya?""Have you told her?" asked Natasha, suddenly beaming all over with joy."Oh, how strange you are with that mustache and those eyebrows!...Natasha--are you glad?""I am so glad, so glad! I was beginning to be vexed with you. I did nottell you, but you have been treating her badly. What a heart she has,Nicholas! I am horrid sometimes, but I was ashamed to be happy whileSonya was not," continued Natasha. "Now I am so glad! Well, run back toher.""No, wait a bit.... Oh, how funny you look!" cried Nicholas, peeringinto her face and finding in his sister too something new, unusual, andbewitchingly tender that he had not seen in her before. "Natasha, it'smagical, isn't it?""Yes," she replied. "You have done splendidly.""Had I seen her before as she is now," thought Nicholas, "I should longago have asked her what to do and have done whatever she told me, andall would have been well.""So you are glad and I have done right?""Oh, quite right! I had a quarrel with Mamma some time ago about it.Mamma said she was angling for you. How could she say such a thing! Inearly stormed at Mamma. I will never let anyone say anything bad ofSonya, for there is nothing but good in her.""Then it's all right?" said Nicholas, again scrutinizing the expressionof his sister's face to see if she was in earnest. Then he jumped downand, his boots scrunching the snow, ran back to his sleigh. The samehappy, smiling Circassian, with mustache and beaming eyes looking upfrom under a sable hood, was still sitting there, and that Circassianwas Sonya, and that Sonya was certainly his future happy and lovingwife.When they reached home and had told their mother how they had spent theevening at the Melyukovs', the girls went to their bedroom. When theyhad undressed, but without washing off the cork mustaches, they sat along time talking of their happiness. They talked of how they would livewhen they were married, how their husbands would be friends, and howhappy they would be. On Natasha's table stood two looking glasses whichDunyasha had prepared beforehand."Only when will all that be? I am afraid never.... It would be toogood!" said Natasha, rising and going to the looking glasses."Sit down, Natasha; perhaps you'll see him," said Sonya.Natasha lit the candles, one on each side of one of the looking glasses,and sat down."I see someone with a mustache," said Natasha, seeing her own face."You mustn't laugh, Miss," said Dunyasha.With Sonya's help and the maid's, Natasha got the glass she held intothe right position opposite the other; her face assumed a seriousexpression and she sat silent. She sat a long time looking at thereceding line of candles reflected in the glasses and expecting (fromtales she had heard) to see a coffin, or him, Prince Andrew, in thatlast dim, indistinctly outlined square. But ready as she was to take thesmallest speck for the image of a man or of a coffin, she saw nothing.She began blinking rapidly and moved away from the looking glasses."Why is it others see things and I don't?" she said. "You sit down now,Sonya. You absolutely must, tonight! Do it for me.... Today I feel sofrightened!"Sonya sat down before the glasses, got the right position, and beganlooking."Now, Miss Sonya is sure to see something," whispered Dunyasha; "whileyou do nothing but laugh."Sonya heard this and Natasha's whisper:"I know she will. She saw something last year."For about three minutes all were silent."Of course she will!" whispered Natasha, but did not finish... suddenlySonya pushed away the glass she was holding and covered her eyes withher hand."Oh, Natasha!" she cried."Did you see? Did you? What was it?" exclaimed Natasha, holding up thelooking glass.Sonya had not seen anything, she was just wanting to blink and to get upwhen she heard Natasha say, "Of course she will!" She did not wish todisappoint either Dunyasha or Natasha, but it was hard to sit still. Shedid not herself know how or why the exclamation escaped her when shecovered her eyes."You saw him?" urged Natasha, seizing her hand."Yes. Wait a bit... I... saw him," Sonya could not help saying, not yetknowing whom Natasha meant by him, Nicholas or Prince Andrew."But why shouldn't I say I saw something? Others do see! Besides who cantell whether I saw anything or not?" flashed through Sonya's mind."Yes, I saw him," she said."How? Standing or lying?""No, I saw... At first there was nothing, then I saw him lying down.""Andrew lying? Is he ill?" asked Natasha, her frightened eyes fixed onher friend."No, on the contrary, on the contrary! His face was cheerful, and heturned to me." And when saying this she herself fancied she had reallyseen what she described."Well, and then, Sonya?...""After that, I could not make out what there was; something blue andred...""Sonya! When will he come back? When shall I see him! O, God, how afraidI am for him and for myself and about everything!..." Natasha began, andwithout replying to Sonya's words of comfort she got into bed, and longafter her candle was out lay open-eyed and motionless, gazing at themoonlight through the frosty windowpanes.CHAPTER XIIISoon after the Christmas holidays Nicholas told his mother of his lovefor Sonya and of his firm resolve to marry her. The countess, who hadlong noticed what was going on between them and was expecting thisdeclaration, listened to him in silence and then told her son that hemight marry whom he pleased, but that neither she nor his father wouldgive their blessing to such a marriage. Nicholas, for the first time,felt that his mother was displeased with him and that, despite her lovefor him, she would not give way. Coldly, without looking at her son, shesent for her husband and, when he came, tried briefly and coldly toinform him of the facts, in her son's presence, but unable to restrainherself she burst into tears of vexation and left the room. The oldcount began irresolutely to admonish Nicholas and beg him to abandon hispurpose. Nicholas replied that he could not go back on his word, and hisfather, sighing and evidently disconcerted, very soon became silent andwent in to the countess. In all his encounters with his son, the countwas always conscious of his own guilt toward him for having wasted thefamily fortune, and so he could not be angry with him for refusing tomarry an heiress and choosing the dowerless Sonya. On this occasion, hewas only more vividly conscious of the fact that if his affairs had notbeen in disorder, no better wife for Nicholas than Sonya could have beenwished for, and that no one but himself with his Mitenka and hisuncomfortable habits was to blame for the condition of the familyfinances.The father and mother did not speak of the matter to their son again,but a few days later the countess sent for Sonya and, with a crueltyneither of them expected, reproached her niece for trying to catchNicholas and for ingratitude. Sonya listened silently with downcast eyesto the countess' cruel words, without understanding what was required ofher. She was ready to sacrifice everything for her benefactors. Self-sacrifice was her most cherished idea but in this case she could not seewhat she ought to sacrifice, or for whom. She could not help loving thecountess and the whole Rostov family, but neither could she help lovingNicholas and knowing that his happiness depended on that love. She wassilent and sad and did not reply. Nicholas felt the situation to beintolerable and went to have an explanation with his mother. He firstimplored her to forgive him and Sonya and consent to their marriage,then he threatened that if she molested Sonya he would at once marry hersecretly.The countess, with a coldness her son had never seen in her before,replied that he was of age, that Prince Andrew was marrying without hisfather's consent, and he could do the same, but that she would neverreceive that intriguer as her daughter.Exploding at the word intriguer, Nicholas, raising his voice, told hismother he had never expected her to try to force him to sell hisfeelings, but if that were so, he would say for the last time.... But hehad no time to utter the decisive word which the expression of his facecaused his mother to await with terror, and which would perhaps haveforever remained a cruel memory to them both. He had not time to say it,for Natasha, with a pale and set face, entered the room from the door atwhich she had been listening."Nicholas, you are talking nonsense! Be quiet, be quiet, be quiet, Itell you!..." she almost screamed, so as to drown his voice."Mamma darling, it's not at all so... my poor, sweet darling," she saidto her mother, who conscious that they had been on the brink of arupture gazed at her son with terror, but in the obstinacy andexcitement of the conflict could not and would not give way."Nicholas, I'll explain to you. Go away! Listen, Mamma darling," saidNatasha.Her words were incoherent, but they attained the purpose at which shewas aiming.The countess, sobbing heavily, hid her face on her daughter's breast,while Nicholas rose, clutching his head, and left the room.Natasha set to work to effect a reconciliation, and so far succeededthat Nicholas received a promise from his mother that Sonya should notbe troubled, while he on his side promised not to undertake anythingwithout his parents' knowledge.Firmly resolved, after putting his affairs in order in the regiment, toretire from the army and return and marry Sonya, Nicholas, serious,sorrowful, and at variance with his parents, but, as it seemed to him,passionately in love, left at the beginning of January to rejoin hisregiment.After Nicholas had gone things in the Rostov household were moredepressing than ever, and the countess fell ill from mental agitation.Sonya was unhappy at the separation from Nicholas and still more so onaccount of the hostile tone the countess could not help adopting towardher. The count was more perturbed than ever by the condition of hisaffairs, which called for some decisive action. Their town house andestate near Moscow had inevitably to be sold, and for this they had togo to Moscow. But the countess' health obliged them to delay theirdeparture from day to day.Natasha, who had borne the first period of separation from her betrothedlightly and even cheerfully, now grew more agitated and impatient everyday. The thought that her best days, which she would have employed inloving him, were being vainly wasted, with no advantage to anyone,tormented her incessantly. His letters for the most part irritated her.It hurt her to think that while she lived only in the thought of him, hewas living a real life, seeing new places and new people that interestedhim. The more interesting his letters were the more vexed she felt. Herletters to him, far from giving her any comfort, seemed to her awearisome and artificial obligation. She could not write, because shecould not conceive the possibility of expressing sincerely in a lettereven a thousandth part of what she expressed by voice, smile, andglance. She wrote to him formal, monotonous, and dry letters, to whichshe attached no importance herself, and in the rough copies of which thecountess corrected her mistakes in spelling.There was still no improvement in the countess' health, but it wasimpossible to defer the journey to Moscow any longer. Natasha'strousseau had to be ordered and the house sold. Moreover, Prince Andrewwas expected in Moscow, where old Prince Bolkonski was spending thewinter, and Natasha felt sure he had already arrived.So the countess remained in the country, and the count, taking Sonya andNatasha with him, went to Moscow at the end of January.BOOK EIGHT: 1811 - 12CHAPTER IAfter Prince Andrew's engagement to Natasha, Pierre without any apparentcause suddenly felt it impossible to go on living as before. Firmlyconvinced as he was of the truths revealed to him by his benefactor, andhappy as he had been in perfecting his inner man, to which he haddevoted himself with such ardor--all the zest of such a life vanishedafter the engagement of Andrew and Natasha and the death of JosephAlexeevich, the news of which reached him almost at the same time. Onlythe skeleton of life remained: his house, a brilliant wife who nowenjoyed the favors of a very important personage, acquaintance with allPetersburg, and his court service with its dull formalities. And thislife suddenly seemed to Pierre unexpectedly loathsome. He ceased keepinga diary, avoided the company of the Brothers, began going to the clubagain, drank a great deal, and came once more in touch with the bachelorsets, leading such a life that the Countess Helene thought it necessaryto speak severely to him about it. Pierre felt that she was right, andto avoid compromising her went away to Moscow.In Moscow as soon as he entered his huge house in which the faded andfading princesses still lived, with its enormous retinue; as soon as,driving through the town, he saw the Iberian shrine with innumerabletapers burning before the golden covers of the icons, the Kremlin Squarewith its snow undisturbed by vehicles, the sleigh drivers and hovels ofthe Sivtsev Vrazhok, those old Moscovites who desired nothing, hurriednowhere, and were ending their days leisurely; when he saw those oldMoscow ladies, the Moscow balls, and the English Club, he felt himselfat home in a quiet haven. In Moscow he felt at peace, at home, warm anddirty as in an old dressing gown.Moscow society, from the old women down to the children, received Pierrelike a long-expected guest whose place was always ready awaiting him.For Moscow society Pierre was the nicest, kindest, most intellectual,merriest, and most magnanimous of cranks, a heedless, genial nobleman ofthe old Russian type. His purse was always empty because it was open toeveryone.Benefit performances, poor pictures, statues, benevolent societies,gypsy choirs, schools, subscription dinners, sprees, Freemasons,churches, and books--no one and nothing met with a refusal from him, andhad it not been for two friends who had borrowed large sums from him andtaken him under their protection, he would have given everything away.There was never a dinner or soiree at the club without him. As soon ashe sank into his place on the sofa after two bottles of Margaux he wassurrounded, and talking, disputing, and joking began. When there werequarrels, his kindly smile and well-timed jests reconciled theantagonists. The masonic dinners were dull and dreary when he was notthere.When after a bachelor supper he rose with his amiable and kindly smile,yielding to the entreaties of the festive company to drive off somewherewith them, shouts of delight and triumph arose among the young men. Atballs he danced if a partner was needed. Young ladies, married andunmarried, liked him because without making love to any of them, he wasequally amiable to all, especially after supper. "Il est charmant; iln'a pas de sexe," * they said of him.* "He is charming; he has no sex."Pierre was one of those retired gentlemen-in-waiting of whom there werehundreds good-humoredly ending their days in Moscow.How horrified he would have been seven years before, when he firstarrived from abroad, had he been told that there was no need for him toseek or plan anything, that his rut had long been shaped, eternallypredetermined, and that wriggle as he might, he would be what all in hisposition were. He could not have believed it! Had he not at one timelonged with all his heart to establish a republic in Russia; thenhimself to be a Napoleon; then to be a philosopher; and then astrategist and the conqueror of Napoleon? Had he not seen thepossibility of, and passionately desired, the regeneration of the sinfulhuman race, and his own progress to the highest degree of perfection?Had he not established schools and hospitals and liberated his serfs?But instead of all that--here he was, the wealthy husband of anunfaithful wife, a retired gentleman-in-waiting, fond of eating anddrinking and, as he unbuttoned his waistcoat, of abusing the governmenta bit, a member of the Moscow English Club, and a universal favorite inMoscow society. For a long time he could not reconcile himself to theidea that he was one of those same retired Moscow gentlemen-in-waitinghe had so despised seven years before.Sometimes he consoled himself with the thought that he was only livingthis life temporarily; but then he was shocked by the thought of howmany, like himself, had entered that life and that club temporarily,with all their teeth and hair, and had only left it when not a singletooth or hair remained.In moments of pride, when he thought of his position it seemed to himthat he was quite different and distinct from those other retiredgentlemen-in-waiting he had formerly despised: they were empty, stupid,contented fellows, satisfied with their position, "while I am stilldiscontented and want to do something for mankind. But perhaps all thesecomrades of mine struggled just like me and sought something new, a pathin life of their own, and like me were brought by force ofcircumstances, society, and race--by that elemental force against whichman is powerless--to the condition I am in," said he to himself inmoments of humility; and after living some time in Moscow he no longerdespised, but began to grow fond of, to respect, and to pity hiscomrades in destiny, as he pitied himself.Pierre no longer suffered moments of despair, hypochondria, and disgustwith life, but the malady that had formerly found expression in suchacute attacks was driven inwards and never left him for a moment. "Whatfor? Why? What is going on in the world?" he would ask himself inperplexity several times a day, involuntarily beginning to reflect anewon the meaning of the phenomena of life; but knowing by experience thatthere were no answers to these questions he made haste to turn away fromthem, and took up a book, or hurried off to the club or to ApollonNikolaevich's, to exchange the gossip of the town."Helene, who has never cared for anything but her own body and is one ofthe stupidest women in the world," thought Pierre, "is regarded bypeople as the acme of intelligence and refinement, and they pay homageto her. Napoleon Bonaparte was despised by all as long as he was great,but now that he has become a wretched comedian the Emperor Francis wantsto offer him his daughter in an illegal marriage. The Spaniards, throughthe Catholic clergy, offer praise to God for their victory over theFrench on the fourteenth of June, and the French, also through theCatholic clergy, offer praise because on that same fourteenth of Junethey defeated the Spaniards. My brother Masons swear by the blood thatthey are ready to sacrifice everything for their neighbor, but they donot give a ruble each to the collections for the poor, and theyintrigue, the Astraea Lodge against the Manna Seekers, and fuss about anauthentic Scotch carpet and a charter that nobody needs, and the meaningof which the very man who wrote it does not understand. We all professthe Christian law of forgiveness of injuries and love of our neighbors,the law in honor of which we have built in Moscow forty times fortychurches--but yesterday a deserter was knouted to death and a ministerof that same law of love and forgiveness, a priest, gave the soldier across to kiss before his execution." So thought Pierre, and the whole ofthis general deception which everyone accepts, accustomed as he was toit, astonished him each time as if it were something new. "I understandthe deception and confusion," he thought, "but how am I to tell them allthat I see? I have tried, and have always found that they too in thedepths of their souls understand it as I do, and only try not to see it.So it appears that it must be so! But I--what is to become of me?"thought he. He had the unfortunate capacity many men, especiallyRussians, have of seeing and believing in the possibility of goodnessand truth, but of seeing the evil and falsehood of life too clearly tobe able to take a serious part in it. Every sphere of work wasconnected, in his eyes, with evil and deception. Whatever he tried tobe, whatever he engaged in, the evil and falsehood of it repulsed himand blocked every path of activity. Yet he had to live and to findoccupation. It was too dreadful to be under the burden of theseinsoluble problems, so he abandoned himself to any distraction in orderto forget them. He frequented every kind of society, drank much, boughtpictures, engaged in building, and above all--read.He read, and read everything that came to hand. On coming home, whilehis valets were still taking off his things, he picked up a book andbegan to read. From reading he passed to sleeping, from sleeping togossip in drawing rooms of the club, from gossip to carousals and women;from carousals back to gossip, reading, and wine. Drinking became moreand more a physical and also a moral necessity. Though the doctorswarned him that with his corpulence wine was dangerous for him, he dranka great deal. He was only quite at ease when having poured severalglasses of wine mechanically into his large mouth he felt a pleasantwarmth in his body, an amiability toward all his fellows, and areadiness to respond superficially to every idea without probing itdeeply. Only after emptying a bottle or two did he feel dimly that theterribly tangled skein of life which previously had terrified him wasnot as dreadful as he had thought. He was always conscious of someaspect of that skein, as with a buzzing in his head after dinner orsupper he chatted or listened to conversation or read. But under theinfluence of wine he said to himself: "It doesn't matter. I'll get itunraveled. I have a solution ready, but have no time now--I'll think itall out later on!" But the later on never came.In the morning, on an empty stomach, all the old questions appeared asinsoluble and terrible as ever, and Pierre hastily picked up a book, andif anyone came to see him he was glad.Sometimes he remembered how he had heard that soldiers in war whenentrenched under the enemy's fire, if they have nothing to do, try hardto find some occupation the more easily to bear the danger. To Pierreall men seemed like those soldiers, seeking refuge from life: some inambition, some in cards, some in framing laws, some in women, some intoys, some in horses, some in politics, some in sport, some in wine, andsome in governmental affairs. "Nothing is trivial, and nothing isimportant, it's all the same--only to save oneself from it as best onecan," thought Pierre. "Only not to see it, that dreadful it!"CHAPTER IIAt the beginning of winter Prince Nicholas Bolkonski and his daughtermoved to Moscow. At that time enthusiasm for the Emperor Alexander'sregime had weakened and a patriotic and anti-French tendency prevailedthere, and this, together with his past and his intellect and hisoriginality, at once made Prince Nicholas Bolkonski an object ofparticular respect to the Moscovites and the center of the Moscowopposition to the government.The prince had aged very much that year. He showed marked signs ofsenility by a tendency to fall asleep, forgetfulness of quite recentevents, remembrance of remote ones, and the childish vanity with whichhe accepted the role of head of the Moscow opposition. In spite of thisthe old man inspired in all his visitors alike a feeling of respectfulveneration--especially of an evening when he came in to tea in his old-fashioned coat and powdered wig and, aroused by anyone, told his abruptstories of the past, or uttered yet more abrupt and scathing criticismsof the present. For them all, that old-fashioned house with its giganticmirrors, pre-Revolution furniture, powdered footmen, and the sternshrewd old man (himself a relic of the past century) with his gentledaughter and the pretty Frenchwoman who were reverently devoted to himpresented a majestic and agreeable spectacle. But the visitors did notreflect that besides the couple of hours during which they saw theirhost, there were also twenty-two hours in the day during which theprivate and intimate life of the house continued.Latterly that private life had become very trying for Princess Mary.There in Moscow she was deprived of her greatest pleasures--talks withthe pilgrims and the solitude which refreshed her at Bald Hills--and shehad none of the advantages and pleasures of city life. She did not goout into society; everyone knew that her father would not let her goanywhere without him, and his failing health prevented his going outhimself, so that she was not invited to dinners and evening parties. Shehad quite abandoned the hope of getting married. She saw the coldnessand malevolence with which the old prince received and dismissed theyoung men, possible suitors, who sometimes appeared at their house. Shehad no friends: during this visit to Moscow she had been disappointed inthe two who had been nearest to her. Mademoiselle Bourienne, with whomshe had never been able to be quite frank, had now become unpleasant toher, and for various reasons Princess Mary avoided her. Julie, with whomshe had corresponded for the last five years, was in Moscow, but provedto be quite alien to her when they met. Just then Julie, who by thedeath of her brothers had become one of the richest heiresses in Moscow,was in the full whirl of society pleasures. She was surrounded by youngmen who, she fancied, had suddenly learned to appreciate her worth.Julie was at that stage in the life of a society woman when she feelsthat her last chance of marrying has come and that her fate must bedecided now or never. On Thursdays Princess Mary remembered with amournful smile that she now had no one to write to, since Julie--whosepresence gave her no pleasure was here and they met every week. Like theold emigre who declined to marry the lady with whom he had spent hisevenings for years, she regretted Julie's presence and having no one towrite to. In Moscow Princess Mary had no one to talk to, no one to whomto confide her sorrow, and much sorrow fell to her lot just then. Thetime for Prince Andrew's return and marriage was approaching, but hisrequest to her to prepare his father for it had not been carried out; infact, it seemed as if matters were quite hopeless, for at every mentionof the young Countess Rostova the old prince (who apart from that wasusually in a bad temper) lost control of himself. Another lately addedsorrow arose from the lessons she gave her six year-old nephew. To herconsternation she detected in herself in relation to little Nicholassome symptoms of her father's irritability. However often she toldherself that she must not get irritable when teaching her nephew, almostevery time that, pointer in hand, she sat down to show him the Frenchalphabet, she so longed to pour her own knowledge quickly and easilyinto the child--who was already afraid that Auntie might at any momentget angry--that at his slightest inattention she trembled, becameflustered and heated, raised her voice, and sometimes pulled him by thearm and put him in the corner. Having put him in the corner she wouldherself begin to cry over her cruel, evil nature, and little Nicholas,following her example, would sob, and without permission would leave hiscorner, come to her, pull her wet hands from her face, and comfort her.But what distressed the princess most of all was her father'sirritability, which was always directed against her and had of lateamounted to cruelty. Had he forced her to prostrate herself to theground all night, had he beaten her or made her fetch wood or water, itwould never have entered her mind to think her position hard; but thisloving despot--the more cruel because he loved her and for that reasontormented himself and her--knew how not merely to hurt and humiliate herdeliberately, but to show her that she was always to blame foreverything. Of late he had exhibited a new trait that tormented PrincessMary more than anything else; this was his ever-increasing intimacy withMademoiselle Bourienne. The idea that at the first moment of receivingthe news of his son's intentions had occurred to him in jest--that ifAndrew got married he himself would marry Bourienne--had evidentlypleased him, and latterly he had persistently, and as it seemed toPrincess Mary merely to offend her, shown special endearments to thecompanion and expressed his dissatisfaction with his daughter bydemonstrations of love of Bourienne.One day in Moscow in Princess Mary's presence (she thought her fatherdid it purposely when she was there) the old prince kissed MademoiselleBourienne's hand and, drawing her to him, embraced her affectionately.Princess Mary flushed and ran out of the room. A few minutes laterMademoiselle Bourienne came into Princess Mary's room smiling and makingcheerful remarks in her agreeable voice. Princess Mary hastily wipedaway her tears, went resolutely up to Mademoiselle Bourienne, andevidently unconscious of what she was doing began shouting in angryhaste at the Frenchwoman, her voice breaking: "It's horrible, vile,inhuman, to take advantage of the weakness..." She did not finish."Leave my room," she exclaimed, and burst into sobs.Next day the prince did not say a word to his daughter, but she noticedthat at dinner he gave orders that Mademoiselle Bourienne should beserved first. After dinner, when the footman handed coffee and fromhabit began with the princess, the prince suddenly grew furious, threwhis stick at Philip, and instantly gave instructions to have himconscripted for the army."He doesn't obey... I said it twice... and he doesn't obey! She is thefirst person in this house; she's my best friend," cried the prince."And if you allow yourself," he screamed in a fury, addressing PrincessMary for the first time, "to forget yourself again before her as youdared to do yesterday, I will show you who is master in this house. Go!Don't let me set eyes on you; beg her pardon!"Princess Mary asked Mademoiselle Bourienne's pardon, and also herfather's pardon for herself and for Philip the footman, who had beggedfor her intervention.At such moments something like a pride of sacrifice gathered in hersoul. And suddenly that father whom she had judged would look for hisspectacles in her presence, fumbling near them and not seeing them, orwould forget something that had just occurred, or take a false step withhis failing legs and turn to see if anyone had noticed his feebleness,or, worst of all, at dinner when there were no visitors to excite himwould suddenly fall asleep, letting his napkin drop and his shaking headsink over his plate. "He is old and feeble, and I dare to condemn him!"she thought at such moments, with a feeling of revulsion againstherself.CHAPTER IIIIn 1811 there was living in Moscow a French doctor--Metivier--who hadrapidly become the fashion. He was enormously tall, handsome, amiable asFrenchmen are, and was, as all Moscow said, an extraordinarily cleverdoctor. He was received in the best houses not merely as a doctor, butas an equal.Prince Nicholas had always ridiculed medicine, but latterly onMademoiselle Bourienne's advice had allowed this doctor to visit him andhad grown accustomed to him. Metivier came to see the prince about twicea week.On December 6--St. Nicholas' Day and the prince's name day--all Moscowcame to the prince's front door but he gave orders to admit no one andto invite to dinner only a small number, a list of whom he gave toPrincess Mary.Metivier, who came in the morning with his felicitations, considered itproper in his quality of doctor de forcer la consigne, * as he toldPrincess Mary, and went in to see the prince. It happened that on thatmorning of his name day the prince was in one of his worst moods. He hadbeen going about the house all the morning finding fault with everyoneand pretending not to understand what was said to him and not to beunderstood himself. Princess Mary well knew this mood of quiet absorbedquerulousness, which generally culminated in a burst of rage, and shewent about all that morning as though facing a cocked and loaded gun andawaited the inevitable explosion. Until the doctor's arrival the morninghad passed off safely. After admitting the doctor, Princess Mary satdown with a book in the drawing room near the door through which shecould hear all that passed in the study.* To force the guard.At first she heard only Metivier's voice, then her father's, then bothvoices began speaking at the same time, the door was flung open, and onthe threshold appeared the handsome figure of the terrified Metivierwith his shock of black hair, and the prince in his dressing gown andfez, his face distorted with fury and the pupils of his eyes rolleddownwards."You don't understand?" shouted the prince, "but I do! French spy, slaveof Buonaparte, spy, get out of my house! Be off, I tell you..."Metivier, shrugging his shoulders, went up to Mademoiselle Bourienne whoat the sound of shouting had run in from an adjoining room."The prince is not very well: bile and rush of blood to the head. Keepcalm, I will call again tomorrow," said Metivier; and putting hisfingers to his lips he hastened away.Through the study door came the sound of slippered feet and the cry:"Spies, traitors, traitors everywhere! Not a moment's peace in my ownhouse!"After Metivier's departure the old prince called his daughter in, andthe whole weight of his wrath fell on her. She was to blame that a spyhad been admitted. Had he not told her, yes, told her to make a list,and not to admit anyone who was not on that list? Then why was thatscoundrel admitted? She was the cause of it all. With her, he said, hecould not have a moment's peace and could not die quietly."No, ma'am! We must part, we must part! Understand that, understand it!I cannot endure any more," he said, and left the room. Then, as ifafraid she might find some means of consolation, he returned and tryingto appear calm added: "And don't imagine I have said this in a moment ofanger. I am calm. I have thought it over, and it will be carried out--wemust part; so find some place for yourself...." But he could notrestrain himself and with the virulence of which only one who loves iscapable, evidently suffering himself, he shook his fists at her andscreamed:"If only some fool would marry her!" Then he slammed the door, sent forMademoiselle Bourienne, and subsided into his study.At two o'clock the six chosen guests assembled for dinner.These guests--the famous Count Rostopchin, Prince Lopukhin with hisnephew, General Chatrov an old war comrade of the prince's, and of theyounger generation Pierre and Boris Drubetskoy--awaited the prince inthe drawing room.Boris, who had come to Moscow on leave a few days before, had beenanxious to be presented to Prince Nicholas Bolkonski, and had contrivedto ingratiate himself so well that the old prince in his case made anexception to the rule of not receiving bachelors in his house.The prince's house did not belong to what is known as fashionablesociety, but his little circle--though not much talked about in town--was one it was more flattering to be received in than any other. Borishad realized this the week before when the commander-in-chief in hispresence invited Rostopchin to dinner on St. Nicholas' Day, andRostopchin had replied that he could not come:"On that day I always go to pay my devotions to the relics of PrinceNicholas Bolkonski.""Oh, yes, yes!" replied the commander-in-chief. "How is he?..."The small group that assembled before dinner in the lofty old-fashioneddrawing room with its old furniture resembled the solemn gathering of acourt of justice. All were silent or talked in low tones. PrinceNicholas came in serious and taciturn. Princess Mary seemed even quieterand more diffident than usual. The guests were reluctant to address her,feeling that she was in no mood for their conversation. Count Rostopchinalone kept the conversation going, now relating the latest town news,and now the latest political gossip.Lopukhin and the old general occasionally took part in the conversation.Prince Bolkonski listened as a presiding judge receives a report, onlynow and then, silently or by a brief word, showing that he took heed ofwhat was being reported to him. The tone of the conversation was such asindicated that no one approved of what was being done in the politicalworld. Incidents were related evidently confirming the opinion thateverything was going from bad to worse, but whether telling a story orgiving an opinion the speaker always stopped, or was stopped, at thepoint beyond which his criticism might touch the sovereign himself.At dinner the talk turned on the latest political news: Napoleon'sseizure of the Duke of Oldenburg's territory, and the Russian Note,hostile to Napoleon, which had been sent to all the European courts."Bonaparte treats Europe as a pirate does a captured vessel," said CountRostopchin, repeating a phrase he had uttered several times before. "Oneonly wonders at the long-suffering or blindness of the crowned heads.Now the Pope's turn has come and Bonaparte doesn't scruple to depose thehead of the Catholic Church--yet all keep silent! Our sovereign alonehas protested against the seizure of the Duke of Oldenburg's territory,and even..." Count Rostopchin paused, feeling that he had reached thelimit beyond which censure was impossible."Other territories have been offered in exchange for the Duchy ofOldenburg," said Prince Bolkonski. "He shifts the Dukes about as I mightmove my serfs from Bald Hills to Bogucharovo or my Ryazan estates.""The Duke of Oldenburg bears his misfortunes with admirable strength ofcharacter and resignation," remarked Boris, joining in respectfully.He said this because on his journey from Petersburg he had had the honorof being presented to the Duke. Prince Bolkonski glanced at the youngman as if about to say something in reply, but changed his mind,evidently considering him too young."I have read our protests about the Oldenburg affair and was surprisedhow badly the Note was worded," remarked Count Rostopchin in the casualtone of a man dealing with a subject quite familiar to him.Pierre looked at Rostopchin with naive astonishment, not understandingwhy he should be disturbed by the bad composition of the Note."Does it matter, Count, how the Note is worded," he asked, "so long asits substance is forcible?""My dear fellow, with our five hundred thousand troops it should be easyto have a good style," returned Count Rostopchin.Pierre now understood the count's dissatisfaction with the wording ofthe Note."One would have thought quill drivers enough had sprung up," remarkedthe old prince. "There in Petersburg they are always writing--not notesonly but even new laws. My Andrew there has written a whole volume oflaws for Russia. Nowadays they are always writing!" and he laughedunnaturally.There was a momentary pause in the conversation; the old general clearedhis throat to draw attention."Did you hear of the last event at the review in Petersburg? The figurecut by the new French ambassador.""Eh? Yes, I heard something: he said something awkward in His Majesty'spresence.""His Majesty drew attention to the Grenadier division and to the marchpast," continued the general, "and it seems the ambassador took nonotice and allowed himself to reply that: 'We in France pay no attentionto such trifles!' The Emperor did not condescend to reply. At the nextreview, they say, the Emperor did not once deign to address him."All were silent. On this fact relating to the Emperor personally, it wasimpossible to pass any judgment."Impudent fellows!" said the prince. "You know Metivier? I turned himout of my house this morning. He was here; they admitted him in spite ofmy request that they should let no one in," he went on, glancing angrilyat his daughter.And he narrated his whole conversation with the French doctor and thereasons that convinced him that Metivier was a spy. Though these reasonswere very insufficient and obscure, no one made any rejoinder.After the roast, champagne was served. The guests rose to congratulatethe old prince. Princess Mary, too, went round to him.He gave her a cold, angry look and offered her his wrinkled, clean-shaven cheek to kiss. The whole expression of his face told her that hehad not forgotten the morning's talk, that his decision remained inforce, and only the presence of visitors hindered his speaking of it toher now.When they went into the drawing room where coffee was served, the oldmen sat together.Prince Nicholas grew more animated and expressed his views on theimpending war.He said that our wars with Bonaparte would be disastrous so long as wesought alliances with the Germans and thrust ourselves into Europeanaffairs, into which we had been drawn by the Peace of Tilsit. "We oughtnot to fight either for or against Austria. Our political interests areall in the East, and in regard to Bonaparte the only thing is to have anarmed frontier and a firm policy, and he will never dare to cross theRussian frontier, as was the case in 1807!""How can we fight the French, Prince?" said Count Rostopchin. "Can wearm ourselves against our teachers and divinities? Look at our youths,look at our ladies! The French are our Gods: Paris is our Kingdom ofHeaven."He began speaking louder, evidently to be heard by everyone."French dresses, French ideas, French feelings! There now, you turnedMetivier out by the scruff of his neck because he is a Frenchman and ascoundrel, but our ladies crawl after him on their knees. I went to aparty last night, and there out of five ladies three were RomanCatholics and had the Pope's indulgence for doing woolwork on Sundays.And they themselves sit there nearly naked, like the signboards at ourPublic Baths if I may say so. Ah, when one looks at our young people,Prince, one would like to take Peter the Great's old cudgel out of themuseum and belabor them in the Russian way till all the nonsense jumpsout of them."All were silent. The old prince looked at Rostopchin with a smile andwagged his head approvingly."Well, good-by, your excellency, keep well!" said Rostopchin, getting upwith characteristic briskness and holding out his hand to the prince."Good-bye, my dear fellow.... His words are music, I never tire ofhearing him!" said the old prince, keeping hold of the hand and offeringhis cheek to be kissed.Following Rostopchin's example the others also rose.CHAPTER IVPrincess Mary as she sat listening to the old men's talk andfaultfinding, understood nothing of what she heard; she only wonderedwhether the guests had all observed her father's hostile attitude towardher. She did not even notice the special attentions and amiabilitiesshown her during dinner by Boris Drubetskoy, who was visiting them forthe third time already.Princess Mary turned with absent-minded questioning look to Pierre, whohat in hand and with a smile on his face was the last of the guests toapproach her after the old prince had gone out and they were left alonein the drawing room."May I stay a little longer?" he said, letting his stout body sink intoan armchair beside her."Oh yes," she answered. "You noticed nothing?" her look asked.Pierre was in an agreeable after-dinner mood. He looked straight beforehim and smiled quietly."Have you known that young man long, Princess?" he asked."Who?""Drubetskoy.""No, not long...""Do you like him?""Yes, he is an agreeable young man.... Why do you ask me that?" saidPrincess Mary, still thinking of that morning's conversation with herfather."Because I have noticed that when a young man comes on leave fromPetersburg to Moscow it is usually with the object of marrying anheiress.""You have observed that?" said Princess Mary."Yes," returned Pierre with a smile, "and this young man now managesmatters so that where there is a wealthy heiress there he is too. I canread him like a book. At present he is hesitating whom to lay siege to--you or Mademoiselle Julie Karagina. He is very attentive to her.""He visits them?""Yes, very often. And do you know the new way of courting?" said Pierrewith an amused smile, evidently in that cheerful mood of good humoredraillery for which he so often reproached himself in his diary."No," replied Princess Mary."To please Moscow girls nowadays one has to be melancholy. He is verymelancholy with Mademoiselle Karagina," said Pierre."Really?" asked Princess Mary, looking into Pierre's kindly face andstill thinking of her own sorrow. "It would be a relief," thought she,"if I ventured to confide what I am feeling to someone. I should like totell everything to Pierre. He is kind and generous. It would be arelief. He would give me advice.""Would you marry him?""Oh, my God, Count, there are moments when I would marry anybody!" shecried suddenly to her own surprise and with tears in her voice. "Ah, howbitter it is to love someone near to you and to feel that..." she wenton in a trembling voice, "that you can do nothing for him but grievehim, and to know that you cannot alter this. Then there is only onething left--to go away, but where could I go?""What is wrong? What is it, Princess?"But without finishing what she was saying, Princess Mary burst intotears."I don't know what is the matter with me today. Don't take any notice--forget what I have said!"Pierre's gaiety vanished completely. He anxiously questioned theprincess, asked her to speak out fully and confide her grief to him; butshe only repeated that she begged him to forget what she had said, thatshe did not remember what she had said, and that she had no troubleexcept the one he knew of--that Prince Andrew's marriage threatened tocause a rupture between father and son."Have you any news of the Rostovs?" she asked, to change the subject. "Iwas told they are coming soon. I am also expecting Andrew any day. Ishould like them to meet here.""And how does he now regard the matter?" asked Pierre, referring to theold prince.Princess Mary shook her head."What is to be done? In a few months the year will be up. The thing isimpossible. I only wish I could spare my brother the first moments. Iwish they would come sooner. I hope to be friends with her. You haveknown them a long time," said Princess Mary. "Tell me honestly the wholetruth: what sort of girl is she, and what do you think of her?--The realtruth, because you know Andrew is risking so much doing this against hisfather's will that I should like to know..."An undefined instinct told Pierre that these explanations, and repeatedrequests to be told the whole truth, expressed ill-will on the princess'part toward her future sister-in-law and a wish that he shoulddisapprove of Andrew's choice; but in reply he said what he felt ratherthan what he thought."I don't know how to answer your question," he said, blushing withoutknowing why. "I really don't know what sort of girl she is; I can'tanalyze her at all. She is enchanting, but what makes her so I don'tknow. That is all one can say about her."Princess Mary sighed, and the expression on her face said: "Yes, that'swhat I expected and feared.""Is she clever?" she asked.Pierre considered."I think not," he said, "and yet--yes. She does not deign to beclever.... Oh no, she is simply enchanting, and that is all."Princess Mary again shook her head disapprovingly."Ah, I so long to like her! Tell her so if you see her before I do.""I hear they are expected very soon," said Pierre.Princess Mary told Pierre of her plan to become intimate with her futuresister-in-law as soon as the Rostovs arrived and to try to accustom theold prince to her.CHAPTER VBoris had not succeeded in making a wealthy match in Petersburg, so withthe same object in view he came to Moscow. There he wavered between thetwo richest heiresses, Julie and Princess Mary. Though Princess Marydespite her plainness seemed to him more attractive than Julie, he,without knowing why, felt awkward about paying court to her. When theyhad last met on the old prince's name day, she had answered at randomall his attempts to talk sentimentally, evidently not listening to whathe was saying.Julie on the contrary accepted his attentions readily, though in amanner peculiar to herself.She was twenty-seven. After the death of her brothers she had becomevery wealthy. She was by now decidedly plain, but thought herself notmerely as good-looking as before but even far more attractive. She wasconfirmed in this delusion by the fact that she had become a verywealthy heiress and also by the fact that the older she grew the lessdangerous she became to men, and the more freely they could associatewith her and avail themselves of her suppers, soirees, and the animatedcompany that assembled at her house, without incurring any obligation. Aman who would have been afraid ten years before of going every day tothe house when there was a girl of seventeen there, for fear ofcompromising her and committing himself, would now go boldly every dayand treat her not as a marriageable girl but as a sexless acquaintance.That winter the Karagins' house was the most agreeable and hospitable inMoscow. In addition to the formal evening and dinner parties, a largecompany, chiefly of men, gathered there every day, supping at midnightand staying till three in the morning. Julie never missed a ball, apromenade, or a play. Her dresses were always of the latest fashion. Butin spite of that she seemed to be disillusioned about everything andtold everyone that she did not believe either in friendship or in love,or any of the joys of life, and expected peace only "yonder." Sheadopted the tone of one who has suffered a great disappointment, like agirl who has either lost the man she loved or been cruelly deceived byhim. Though nothing of the kind had happened to her she was regarded inthat light, and had even herself come to believe that she had sufferedmuch in life. This melancholy, which did not prevent her amusingherself, did not hinder the young people who came to her house frompassing the time pleasantly. Every visitor who came to the house paidhis tribute to the melancholy mood of the hostess, and then amusedhimself with society gossip, dancing, intellectual games, and boutsrimes, which were in vogue at the Karagins'. Only a few of these youngmen, among them Boris, entered more deeply into Julie's melancholy, andwith these she had prolonged conversations in private on the vanity ofall worldly things, and to them she showed her albums filled withmournful sketches, maxims, and verses.To Boris, Julie was particularly gracious: she regretted his earlydisillusionment with life, offered him such consolation of friendship asshe who had herself suffered so much could render, and showed him heralbum. Boris sketched two trees in the album and wrote: "Rustic trees,your dark branches shed gloom and melancholy upon me."On another page he drew a tomb, and wrote:La mort est secourable et la mort est tranquille. Ah! contre lesdouleurs il n'y a pas d'autre asile. ** Death gives relief and death is peaceful.Ah! from suffering there is no other refuge.Julie said this was charming"There is something so enchanting in the smile of melancholy," she saidto Boris, repeating word for word a passage she had copied from a book."It is a ray of light in the darkness, a shade between sadness anddespair, showing the possibility of consolation."In reply Boris wrote these lines:Aliment de poison d'une ame trop sensible, Toi, sans qui le bonheur meserait impossible, Tendre melancholie, ah, viens me consoler, Vienscalmer les tourments de ma sombre retraite, Et mele une douceur secreteA ces pleurs que je sens couler. **Poisonous nourishment of a too sensitive soul, Thou, without whomhappiness would for me be impossible, Tender melancholy, ah, come toconsole me, Come to calm the torments of my gloomy retreat, And mingle asecret sweetness With these tears that I feel to be flowing.For Boris, Julie played most doleful nocturnes on her harp. Boris read'Poor Liza' aloud to her, and more than once interrupted the readingbecause of the emotions that choked him. Meeting at large gatheringsJulie and Boris looked on one another as the only souls who understoodone another in a world of indifferent people.Anna Mikhaylovna, who often visited the Karagins, while playing cardswith the mother made careful inquiries as to Julie's dowry (she was tohave two estates in Penza and the Nizhegorod forests). Anna Mikhaylovnaregarded the refined sadness that united her son to the wealthy Juliewith emotion, and resignation to the Divine will."You are always charming and melancholy, my dear Julie," she said to thedaughter. "Boris says his soul finds repose at your house. He hassuffered so many disappointments and is so sensitive," said she to themother. "Ah, my dear, I can't tell you how fond I have grown of Julielatterly," she said to her son. "But who could help loving her? She isan angelic being! Ah, Boris, Boris!"--she paused. "And how I pity hermother," she went on; "today she showed me her accounts and letters fromPenza (they have enormous estates there), and she, poor thing, has noone to help her, and they do cheat her so!"Boris smiled almost imperceptibly while listening to his mother. Helaughed blandly at her naive diplomacy but listened to what she had tosay, and sometimes questioned her carefully about the Penza andNizhegorod estates.Julie had long been expecting a proposal from her melancholy adorer andwas ready to accept it; but some secret feeling of repulsion for her,for her passionate desire to get married, for her artificiality, and afeeling of horror at renouncing the possibility of real love stillrestrained Boris. His leave was expiring. He spent every day and wholedays at the Karagins', and every day on thinking the matter over toldhimself that he would propose tomorrow. But in Julie's presence, lookingat her red face and chin (nearly always powdered), her moist eyes, andher expression of continual readiness to pass at once from melancholy toan unnatural rapture of married bliss, Boris could not utter thedecisive words, though in imagination he had long regarded himself asthe possessor of those Penza and Nizhegorod estates and had apportionedthe use of the income from them. Julie saw Boris' indecision, andsometimes the thought occurred to her that she was repulsive to him, buther feminine self-deception immediately supplied her with consolation,and she told herself that he was only shy from love. Her melancholy,however, began to turn to irritability, and not long before Boris'departure she formed a definite plan of action. Just as Boris' leave ofabsence was expiring, Anatole Kuragin made his appearance in Moscow, andof course in the Karagins' drawing room, and Julie, suddenly abandoningher melancholy, became cheerful and very attentive to Kuragin."My dear," said Anna Mikhaylovna to her son, "I know from a reliablesource that Prince Vasili has sent his son to Moscow to get him marriedto Julie. I am so fond of Julie that I should be sorry for her. What doyou think of it, my dear?"The idea of being made a fool of and of having thrown away that wholemonth of arduous melancholy service to Julie, and of seeing all therevenue from the Penza estates which he had already mentally apportionedand put to proper use fall into the hands of another, and especiallyinto the hands of that idiot Anatole, pained Boris. He drove to theKaragins' with the firm intention of proposing. Julie met him in a gay,careless manner, spoke casually of how she had enjoyed yesterday's ball,and asked when he was leaving. Though Boris had come intentionally tospeak of his love and therefore meant to be tender, he began speakingirritably of feminine inconstancy, of how easily women can turn fromsadness to joy, and how their moods depend solely on who happens to bepaying court to them. Julie was offended and replied that it was truethat a woman needs variety, and the same thing over and over again wouldweary anyone."Then I should advise you..." Boris began, wishing to sting her; but atthat instant the galling thought occurred to him that he might have toleave Moscow without having accomplished his aim, and have vainly wastedhis efforts--which was a thing he never allowed to happen.He checked himself in the middle of the sentence, lowered his eyes toavoid seeing her unpleasantly irritated and irresolute face, and said:"I did not come here at all to quarrel with you. On the contrary..."He glanced at her to make sure that he might go on. Her irritability hadsuddenly quite vanished, and her anxious, imploring eyes were fixed onhim with greedy expectation. "I can always arrange so as not to see heroften," thought Boris. "The affair has been begun and must be finished!"He blushed hotly, raised his eyes to hers, and said:"You know my feelings for you!"There was no need to say more: Julie's face shone with triumph and self-satisfaction; but she forced Boris to say all that is said on suchoccasions--that he loved her and had never loved any other woman morethan her. She knew that for the Penza estates and Nizhegorod forests shecould demand this, and she received what she demanded.The affianced couple, no longer alluding to trees that shed gloom andmelancholy upon them, planned the arrangements of a splendid house inPetersburg, paid calls, and prepared everything for a brilliant wedding.CHAPTER VIAt the end of January old Count Rostov went to Moscow with Natasha andSonya. The countess was still unwell and unable to travel but it wasimpossible to wait for her recovery. Prince Andrew was expected inMoscow any day, the trousseau had to be ordered and the estate nearMoscow had to be sold, besides which the opportunity of presenting hisfuture daughter-in-law to old Prince Bolkonski while he was in Moscowcould not be missed. The Rostovs' Moscow house had not been heated thatwinter and, as they had come only for a short time and the countess wasnot with them, the count decided to stay with Marya DmitrievnaAkhrosimova, who had long been pressing her hospitality on them.Late one evening the Rostovs' four sleighs drove into Marya Dmitrievna'scourtyard in the old Konyusheny street. Marya Dmitrievna lived alone.She had already married off her daughter, and her sons were all in theservice.She held herself as erect, told everyone her opinion as candidly,loudly, and bluntly as ever, and her whole bearing seemed a reproach toothers for any weakness, passion, or temptation--the possibility ofwhich she did not admit. From early in the morning, wearing a dressingjacket, she attended to her household affairs, and then she drove out:on holy days to church and after the service to jails and prisons onaffairs of which she never spoke to anyone. On ordinary days, afterdressing, she received petitioners of various classes, of whom therewere always some. Then she had dinner, a substantial and appetizing mealat which there were always three or four guests; after dinner she playeda game of boston, and at night she had the newspapers or a new book readto her while she knitted. She rarely made an exception and went out topay visits, and then only to the most important persons in the town.She had not yet gone to bed when the Rostovs arrived and the pulley ofthe hall door squeaked from the cold as it let in the Rostovs and theirservants. Marya Dmitrievna, with her spectacles hanging down on her noseand her head flung back, stood in the hall doorway looking with a stern,grim face at the new arrivals. One might have thought she was angry withthe travelers and would immediately turn them out, had she not at thesame time been giving careful instructions to the servants for theaccommodation of the visitors and their belongings."The count's things? Bring them here," she said, pointing to theportmanteaus and not greeting anyone. "The young ladies'? There to theleft. Now what are you dawdling for?" she cried to the maids. "Get thesamovar ready!... You've grown plumper and prettier," she remarked,drawing Natasha (whose cheeks were glowing from the cold) to her by thehood. "Foo! You are cold! Now take off your things, quick!" she shoutedto the count who was going to kiss her hand. "You're half frozen, I'msure! Bring some rum for tea!... Bonjour, Sonya dear!" she added,turning to Sonya and indicating by this French greeting her slightlycontemptuous though affectionate attitude toward her.When they came in to tea, having taken off their outdoor things andtidied themselves up after their journey, Marya Dmitrievna kissed themall in due order."I'm heartily glad you have come and are staying with me. It was hightime," she said, giving Natasha a significant look. "The old man is hereand his son's expected any day. You'll have to make his acquaintance.But we'll speak of that later on," she added, glancing at Sonya with alook that showed she did not want to speak of it in her presence. "Nowlisten," she said to the count. "What do you want tomorrow? Whom willyou send for? Shinshin?" she crooked one of her fingers. "The snivelingAnna Mikhaylovna? That's two. She's here with her son. The son isgetting married! Then Bezukhov, eh? He is here too, with his wife. Heran away from her and she came galloping after him. He dined with me onWednesday. As for them"--and she pointed to the girls--"tomorrow I'lltake them first to the Iberian shrine of the Mother of God, and thenwe'll drive to the Super-Rogue's. I suppose you'll have everything new.Don't judge by me: sleeves nowadays are this size! The other day youngPrincess Irina Vasilevna came to see me; she was an awful sight--lookedas if she had put two barrels on her arms. You know not a day passes nowwithout some new fashion.... And what have you to do yourself?" sheasked the count sternly."One thing has come on top of another: her rags to buy, and now apurchaser has turned up for the Moscow estate and for the house. If youwill be so kind, I'll fix a time and go down to the estate just for aday, and leave my lassies with you.""All right. All right. They'll be safe with me, as safe as in Chancery!I'll take them where they must go, scold them a bit, and pet them abit," said Marya Dmitrievna, touching her goddaughter and favorite,Natasha, on the cheek with her large hand.Next morning Marya Dmitrievna took the young ladies to the Iberianshrine of the Mother of God and to Madame Suppert-Roguet, who was soafraid of Marya Dmitrievna that she always let her have costumes at aloss merely to get rid of her. Marya Dmitrievna ordered almost the wholetrousseau. When they got home she turned everybody out of the roomexcept Natasha, and then called her pet to her armchair."Well, now we'll talk. I congratulate you on your betrothed. You'vehooked a fine fellow! I am glad for your sake and I've known him sincehe was so high." She held her hand a couple of feet from the ground.Natasha blushed happily. "I like him and all his family. Now listen! Youknow that old Prince Nicholas much dislikes his son's marrying. The oldfellow's crotchety! Of course Prince Andrew is not a child and can shiftwithout him, but it's not nice to enter a family against a father'swill. One wants to do it peacefully and lovingly. You're a clever girland you'll know how to manage. Be kind, and use your wits. Then all willbe well."Natasha remained silent, from shyness Marya Dmitrievna supposed, butreally because she disliked anyone interfering in what touched her loveof Prince Andrew, which seemed to her so apart from all human affairsthat no one could understand it. She loved and knew Prince Andrew, heloved her only, and was to come one of these days and take her. Shewanted nothing more."You see I have known him a long time and am also fond of Mary, yourfuture sister-in-law. 'Husbands' sisters bring up blisters,' but thisone wouldn't hurt a fly. She has asked me to bring you two together.Tomorrow you'll go with your father to see her. Be very nice andaffectionate to her: you're younger than she. When he comes, he'll findyou already know his sister and father and are liked by them. Am I rightor not? Won't that be best?""Yes, it will," Natasha answered reluctantly.CHAPTER VIINext day, by Marya Dmitrievna's advice, Count Rostov took Natasha tocall on Prince Nicholas Bolkonski. The count did not set out cheerfullyon this visit, at heart he felt afraid. He well remembered the lastinterview he had had with the old prince at the time of the enrollment,when in reply to an invitation to dinner he had had to listen to anangry reprimand for not having provided his full quota of men. Natasha,on the other hand, having put on her best gown, was in the highestspirits. "They can't help liking me," she thought. "Everybody always hasliked me, and I am so willing to do anything they wish, so ready to befond of him--for being his father--and of her--for being his sister--that there is no reason for them not to like me..."They drove up to the gloomy old house on the Vozdvizhenka and enteredthe vestibule."Well, the Lord have mercy on us!" said the count, half in jest, half inearnest; but Natasha noticed that her father was flurried on enteringthe anteroom and inquired timidly and softly whether the prince andprincess were at home.When they had been announced a perturbation was noticeable among theservants. The footman who had gone to announce them was stopped byanother in the large hall and they whispered to one another. Then amaidservant ran into the hall and hurriedly said something, mentioningthe princess. At last an old, cross looking footman came and announcedto the Rostovs that the prince was not receiving, but that the princessbegged them to walk up. The first person who came to meet the visitorswas Mademoiselle Bourienne. She greeted the father and daughter withspecial politeness and showed them to the princess' room. The princess,looking excited and nervous, her face flushed in patches, ran in to meetthe visitors, treading heavily, and vainly trying to appear cordial andat ease. From the first glance Princess Mary did not like Natasha. Shethought her too fashionably dressed, frivolously gay and vain. She didnot at all realize that before having seen her future sister-in-law shewas prejudiced against her by involuntary envy of her beauty, youth, andhappiness, as well as by jealousy of her brother's love for her. Apartfrom this insuperable antipathy to her, Princess Mary was agitated justthen because on the Rostovs' being announced, the old prince had shoutedthat he did not wish to see them, that Princess Mary might do so if shechose, but they were not to be admitted to him. She had decided toreceive them, but feared lest the prince might at any moment indulge insome freak, as he seemed much upset by the Rostovs' visit."There, my dear princess, I've brought you my songstress," said thecount, bowing and looking round uneasily as if afraid the old princemight appear. "I am so glad you should get to know one another... verysorry the prince is still ailing," and after a few more commonplaceremarks he rose. "If you'll allow me to leave my Natasha in your handsfor a quarter of an hour, Princess, I'll drive round to see AnnaSemenovna, it's quite near in the Dogs' Square, and then I'll come backfor her."The count had devised this diplomatic ruse (as he afterwards told hisdaughter) to give the future sisters-in-law an opportunity to talk toone another freely, but another motive was to avoid the danger ofencountering the old prince, of whom he was afraid. He did not mentionthis to his daughter, but Natasha noticed her father's nervousness andanxiety and felt mortified by it. She blushed for him, grew stillangrier at having blushed, and looked at the princess with a bold anddefiant expression which said that she was not afraid of anybody. Theprincess told the count that she would be delighted, and only begged himto stay longer at Anna Semenovna's, and he departed.Despite the uneasy glances thrown at her by Princess Mary--who wished tohave a tte--tte with Natasha--Mademoiselle Bourienne remained in theroom and persistently talked about Moscow amusements and theaters.Natasha felt offended by the hesitation she had noticed in the anteroom,by her father's nervousness, and by the unnatural manner of the princesswho--she thought--was making a favor of receiving her, and so everythingdispleased her. She did not like Princess Mary, whom she thought veryplain, affected, and dry. Natasha suddenly shrank into herself andinvoluntarily assumed an offhand air which alienated Princess Mary stillmore. After five minutes of irksome, constrained conversation, theyheard the sound of slippered feet rapidly approaching. Princess Marylooked frightened.The door opened and the old prince, in a dressing gown and a whitenightcap, came in."Ah, madam!" he began. "Madam, Countess... Countess Rostova, if I am notmistaken... I beg you to excuse me, to excuse me... I did not know,madam. God is my witness, I did not know you had honored us with avisit, and I came in such a costume only to see my daughter. I beg youto excuse me... God is my witness, I didn't know-" he repeated,stressing the word "God" so unnaturally and so unpleasantly thatPrincess Mary stood with downcast eyes not daring to look either at herfather or at Natasha.Nor did the latter, having risen and curtsied, know what to do.Mademoiselle Bourienne alone smiled agreeably."I beg you to excuse me, excuse me! God is my witness, I did not know,"muttered the old man, and after looking Natasha over from head to foothe went out.Mademoiselle Bourienne was the first to recover herself after thisapparition and began speaking about the prince's indisposition. Natashaand Princess Mary looked at one another in silence, and the longer theydid so without saying what they wanted to say, the greater grew theirantipathy to one another.When the count returned, Natasha was impolitely pleased and hastened toget away: at that moment she hated the stiff, elderly princess, whocould place her in such an embarrassing position and had spent half anhour with her without once mentioning Prince Andrew. "I couldn't begintalking about him in the presence of that Frenchwoman," thought Natasha.The same thought was meanwhile tormenting Princess Mary. She knew whatshe ought to have said to Natasha, but she had been unable to say itbecause Mademoiselle Bourienne was in the way, and because, withoutknowing why, she felt it very difficult to speak of the marriage. Whenthe count was already leaving the room, Princess Mary went up hurriedlyto Natasha, took her by the hand, and said with a deep sigh:"Wait, I must..."Natasha glanced at her ironically without knowing why."Dear Natalie," said Princess Mary, "I want you to know that I am gladmy brother has found happiness...."She paused, feeling that she was not telling the truth. Natasha noticedthis and guessed its reason."I think, Princess, it is not convenient to speak of that now," she saidwith external dignity and coldness, though she felt the tears chokingher."What have I said and what have I done?" thought she, as soon as she wasout of the room.They waited a long time for Natasha to come to dinner that day. She satin her room crying like a child, blowing her nose and sobbing. Sonyastood beside her, kissing her hair."Natasha, what is it about?" she asked. "What do they matter to you? Itwill all pass, Natasha.""But if you only knew how offensive it was... as if I...""Don't talk about it, Natasha. It wasn't your fault so why should youmind? Kiss me," said Sonya.Natasha raised her head and, kissing her friend on the lips, pressed herwet face against her."I can't tell you, I don't know. No one's to blame," said Natasha--"It'smy fault. But it all hurts terribly. Oh, why doesn't he come?..."She came in to dinner with red eyes. Marya Dmitrievna, who knew how theprince had received the Rostovs, pretended not to notice how upsetNatasha was and jested resolutely and loudly at table with the count andthe other guests.CHAPTER VIIIThat evening the Rostovs went to the Opera, for which Marya Dmitrievnahad taken a box.Natasha did not want to go, but could not refuse Marya Dmitrievna's kindoffer which was intended expressly for her. When she came ready dressedinto the ballroom to await her father, and looking in the large mirrorthere saw that she was pretty, very pretty, she felt even more sad, butit was a sweet, tender sadness."O God, if he were here now I would not behave as I did then, butdifferently. I would not be silly and afraid of things, I would simplyembrace him, cling to him, and make him look at me with those searchinginquiring eyes with which he has so often looked at me, and then I wouldmake him laugh as he used to laugh. And his eyes--how I see those eyes!"thought Natasha. "And what do his father and sister matter to me? I lovehim alone, him, him, with that face and those eyes, with his smile,manly and yet childlike.... No, I had better not think of him; not thinkof him but forget him, quite forget him for the present. I can't bearthis waiting and I shall cry in a minute!" and she turned away from theglass, making an effort not to cry. "And how can Sonya love Nicholas socalmly and quietly and wait so long and so patiently?" thought she,looking at Sonya, who also came in quite ready, with a fan in her hand."No, she's altogether different. I can't!"Natasha at that moment felt so softened and tender that it was notenough for her to love and know she was beloved, she wanted now, atonce, to embrace the man she loved, to speak and hear from him words oflove such as filled her heart. While she sat in the carriage beside herfather, pensively watching the lights of the street lamps flickering onthe frozen window, she felt still sadder and more in love, and forgotwhere she was going and with whom. Having fallen into the line ofcarriages, the Rostovs' carriage drove up to the theater, its wheelssqueaking over the snow. Natasha and Sonya, holding up their dresses,jumped out quickly. The count got out helped by the footmen, and,passing among men and women who were entering and the program sellers,they all three went along the corridor to the first row of boxes.Through the closed doors the music was already audible."Natasha, your hair!..." whispered Sonya.An attendant deferentially and quickly slipped before the ladies andopened the door of their box. The music sounded louder and through thedoor rows of brightly lit boxes in which ladies sat with bare arms andshoulders, and noisy stalls brilliant with uniforms, glittered beforetheir eyes. A lady entering the next box shot a glance of feminine envyat Natasha. The curtain had not yet risen and the overture was beingplayed. Natasha, smoothing her gown, went in with Sonya and sat down,scanning the brilliant tiers of boxes opposite. A sensation she had notexperienced for a long time--that of hundreds of eyes looking at herbare arms and neck--suddenly affected her both agreeably anddisagreeably and called up a whole crowd of memories, desires andemotions associated with that feeling.The two remarkably pretty girls, Natasha and Sonya, with Count Rostovwho had not been seen in Moscow for a long time, attracted generalattention. Moreover, everybody knew vaguely of Natasha's engagement toPrince Andrew, and knew that the Rostovs had lived in the country eversince, and all looked with curiosity at a fiancee who was making one ofthe best matches in Russia.Natasha's looks, as everyone told her, had improved in the country, andthat evening thanks to her agitation she was particularly pretty. Shestruck those who saw her by her fullness of life and beauty, combinedwith her indifference to everything about her. Her black eyes looked atthe crowd without seeking anyone, and her delicate arm, bare to abovethe elbow, lay on the velvet edge of the box, while, evidentlyunconsciously, she opened and closed her hand in time to the music,crumpling her program. "Look, there's Alenina," said Sonya, "with hermother, isn't it?""Dear me, Michael Kirilovich has grown still stouter!" remarked thecount."Look at our Anna Mikhaylovna--what a headdress she has on!""The Karagins, Julie--and Boris with them. One can see at once thatthey're engaged....""Drubetskoy has proposed?""Oh yes, I heard it today," said Shinshin, coming into the Rostovs' box.Natasha looked in the direction in which her father's eyes were turnedand saw Julie sitting beside her mother with a happy look on her faceand a string of pearls round her thick red neck--which Natasha knew wascovered with powder. Behind them, wearing a smile and leaning over withan ear to Julie's mouth, was Boris' handsome smoothly brushed head. Helooked at the Rostovs from under his brows and said something, smiling,to his betrothed."They are talking about us, about me and him!" thought Natasha. "And heno doubt is calming her jealousy of me. They needn't trouble themselves!If only they knew how little I am concerned about any of them."Behind them sat Anna Mikhaylovna wearing a green headdress and with ahappy look of resignation to the will of God on her face. Their box waspervaded by that atmosphere of an affianced couple which Natasha knew sowell and liked so much. She turned away and suddenly remembered all thathad been so humiliating in her morning's visit."What right has he not to wish to receive me into his family? Oh, betternot think of it--not till he comes back!" she told herself, and beganlooking at the faces, some strange and some familiar, in the stalls. Inthe front, in the very center, leaning back against the orchestra rail,stood Dolokhov in a Persian dress, his curly hair brushed up into a hugeshock. He stood in full view of the audience, well aware that he wasattracting everyone's attention, yet as much at ease as though he werein his own room. Around him thronged Moscow's most brilliant young men,whom he evidently dominated.The count, laughing, nudged the blushing Sonya and pointed to her formeradorer."Do you recognize him?" said he. "And where has he sprung from?" heasked, turning to Shinshin. "Didn't he vanish somewhere?""He did," replied Shinshin. "He was in the Caucasus and ran away fromthere. They say he has been acting as minister to some ruling prince inPersia, where he killed the Shah's brother. Now all the Moscow ladiesare mad about him! It's 'Dolokhov the Persian' that does it! We neverhear a word but Dolokhov is mentioned. They swear by him, they offer himto you as they would a dish of choice sterlet. Dolokhov and AnatoleKuragin have turned all our ladies' heads."A tall, beautiful woman with a mass of plaited hair and much exposedplump white shoulders and neck, round which she wore a double string oflarge pearls, entered the adjoining box rustling her heavy silk dressand took a long time settling into her place.Natasha involuntarily gazed at that neck, those shoulders, and pearlsand coiffure, and admired the beauty of the shoulders and the pearls.While Natasha was fixing her gaze on her for the second time the ladylooked round and, meeting the count's eyes, nodded to him and smiled.She was the Countess Bezukhova, Pierre's wife, and the count, who kneweveryone in society, leaned over and spoke to her."Have you been here long, Countess?" he inquired. "I'll call, I'll callto kiss your hand. I'm here on business and have brought my girls withme. They say Semenova acts marvelously. Count Pierre never used toforget us. Is he here?""Yes, he meant to look in," answered Helene, and glanced attentively atNatasha.Count Rostov resumed his seat."Handsome, isn't she?" he whispered to Natasha."Wonderful!" answered Natasha. "She's a woman one could easily fall inlove with."Just then the last chords of the overture were heard and the conductortapped with his stick. Some latecomers took their seats in the stalls,and the curtain rose.As soon as it rose everyone in the boxes and stalls became silent, andall the men, old and young, in uniform and evening dress, and all thewomen with gems on their bare flesh, turned their whole attention witheager curiosity to the stage. Natasha too began to look at it.CHAPTER IXThe floor of the stage consisted of smooth boards, at the sides was somepainted cardboard representing trees, and at the back was a clothstretched over boards. In the center of the stage sat some girls in redbodices and white skirts. One very fat girl in a white silk dress satapart on a low bench, to the back of which a piece of green cardboardwas glued. They all sang something. When they had finished their songthe girl in white went up to the prompter's box and a man with tightsilk trousers over his stout legs, and holding a plume and a dagger,went up to her and began singing, waving his arms about.First the man in the tight trousers sang alone, then she sang, then theyboth paused while the orchestra played and the man fingered the hand ofthe girl in white, obviously awaiting the beat to start singing withher. They sang together and everyone in the theater began clapping andshouting, while the man and woman on the stage--who represented lovers--began smiling, spreading out their arms, and bowing.After her life in the country, and in her present serious mood, all thisseemed grotesque and amazing to Natasha. She could not follow the operanor even listen to the music; she saw only the painted cardboard and thequeerly dressed men and women who moved, spoke, and sang so strangely inthat brilliant light. She knew what it was all meant to represent, butit was so pretentiously false and unnatural that she first felt ashamedfor the actors and then amused at them. She looked at the faces of theaudience, seeking in them the same sense of ridicule and perplexity sheherself experienced, but they all seemed attentive to what was happeningon the stage, and expressed delight which to Natasha seemed feigned. "Isuppose it has to be like this!" she thought. She kept looking round inturn at the rows of pomaded heads in the stalls and then at the seminudewomen in the boxes, especially at Helene in the next box, who--apparently quite unclothed--sat with a quiet tranquil smile, not takingher eyes off the stage. And feeling the bright light that flooded thewhole place and the warm air heated by the crowd, Natasha little bylittle began to pass into a state of intoxication she had notexperienced for a long while. She did not realize who and where she was,nor what was going on before her. As she looked and thought, thestrangest fancies unexpectedly and disconnectedly passed through hermind: the idea occurred to her of jumping onto the edge of the box andsinging the air the actress was singing, then she wished to touch withher fan an old gentleman sitting not far from her, then to lean over toHelene and tickle her.At a moment when all was quiet before the commencement of a song, a doorleading to the stalls on the side nearest the Rostovs' box creaked, andthe steps of a belated arrival were heard. "There's Kuragin!" whisperedShinshin. Countess Bezukhova turned smiling to the newcomer, andNatasha, following the direction of that look, saw an exceptionallyhandsome adjutant approaching their box with a self-assured yetcourteous bearing. This was Anatole Kuragin whom she had seen andnoticed long ago at the ball in Petersburg. He was now in an adjutant'suniform with one epaulet and a shoulder knot. He moved with a restrainedswagger which would have been ridiculous had he not been so good-lookingand had his handsome face not worn such an expression of good-humoredcomplacency and gaiety. Though the performance was proceeding, he walkeddeliberately down the carpeted gangway, his sword and spurs slightlyjingling and his handsome perfumed head held high. Having looked atNatasha he approached his sister, laid his well gloved hand on the edgeof her box, nodded to her, and leaning forward asked a question, with amotion toward Natasha."Mais charmante!" said he, evidently referring to Natasha, who did notexactly hear his words but understood them from the movement of hislips. Then he took his place in the first row of the stalls and sat downbeside Dolokhov, nudging with his elbow in a friendly and offhand waythat Dolokhov whom others treated so fawningly. He winked at him gaily,smiled, and rested his foot against the orchestra screen."How like the brother is to the sister," remarked the count. "And howhandsome they both are!"Shinshin, lowering his voice, began to tell the count of some intrigueof Kuragin's in Moscow, and Natasha tried to overhear it just because hehad said she was "charmante."The first act was over. In the stalls everyone began moving about, goingout and coming in.Boris came to the Rostovs' box, received their congratulations verysimply, and raising his eyebrows with an absent-minded smile conveyed toNatasha and Sonya his fiancee's invitation to her wedding, and wentaway. Natasha with a gay, coquettish smile talked to him, andcongratulated on his approaching wedding that same Boris with whom shehad formerly been in love. In the state of intoxication she was in,everything seemed simple and natural.The scantily clad Helene smiled at everyone in the same way, and Natashagave Boris a similar smile.Helene's box was filled and surrounded from the stalls by the mostdistinguished and intellectual men, who seemed to vie with one anotherin their wish to let everyone see that they knew her.During the whole of that entr'acte Kuragin stood with Dolokhov in frontof the orchestra partition, looking at the Rostovs' box. Natasha knew hewas talking about her and this afforded her pleasure. She even turned sothat he should see her profile in what she thought was its most becomingaspect. Before the beginning of the second act Pierre appeared in thestalls. The Rostovs had not seen him since their arrival. His facelooked sad, and he had grown still stouter since Natasha last saw him.He passed up to the front rows, not noticing anyone. Anatole went up tohim and began speaking to him, looking at and indicating the Rostovs'box. On seeing Natasha Pierre grew animated and, hastily passing betweenthe rows, came toward their box. When he got there he leaned on hiselbows and, smiling, talked to her for a long time. While conversingwith Pierre, Natasha heard a man's voice in Countess Bezukhova's box andsomething told her it was Kuragin. She turned and their eyes met. Almostsmiling, he gazed straight into her eyes with such an enrapturedcaressing look that it seemed strange to be so near him, to look at himlike that, to be so sure he admired her, and not to be acquainted withhim.In the second act there was scenery representing tombstones, there was around hole in the canvas to represent the moon, shades were raised overthe footlights, and from horns and contrabass came deep notes while manypeople appeared from right and left wearing black cloaks and holdingthings like daggers in their hands. They began waving their arms. Thensome other people ran in and began dragging away the maiden who had beenin white and was now in light blue. They did not drag her away at once,but sang with her for a long time and then at last dragged her off, andbehind the scenes something metallic was struck three times and everyoneknelt down and sang a prayer. All these things were repeatedlyinterrupted by the enthusiastic shouts of the audience.During this act every time Natasha looked toward the stalls she sawAnatole Kuragin with an arm thrown across the back of his chair, staringat her. She was pleased to see that he was captivated by her and it didnot occur to her that there was anything wrong in it.When the second act was over Countess Bezukhova rose, turned to theRostovs' box--her whole bosom completely exposed--beckoned the old countwith a gloved finger, and paying no attention to those who had enteredher box began talking to him with an amiable smile."Do make me acquainted with your charming daughters," said she. "Thewhole town is singing their praises and I don't even know them!"Natasha rose and curtsied to the splendid countess. She was so pleasedby praise from this brilliant beauty that she blushed with pleasure."I want to become a Moscovite too, now," said Helene. "How is it you'renot ashamed to bury such pearls in the country?"Countess Bezukhova quite deserved her reputation of being a fascinatingwoman. She could say what she did not think--especially what wasflattering--quite simply and naturally."Dear count, you must let me look after your daughters! Though I am notstaying here long this time--nor are you--I will try to amuse them. Ihave already heard much of you in Petersburg and wanted to get to knowyou," said she to Natasha with her stereotyped and lovely smile. "I hadheard about you from my page, Drubetskoy. Have you heard he is gettingmarried? And also from my husband's friend Bolkonski, Prince AndrewBolkonski," she went on with special emphasis, implying that she knew ofhis relation to Natasha. To get better acquainted she asked that one ofthe young ladies should come into her box for the rest of theperformance, and Natasha moved over to it.The scene of the third act represented a palace in which many candleswere burning and pictures of knights with short beards hung on thewalls. In the middle stood what were probably a king and a queen. Theking waved his right arm and, evidently nervous, sang something badlyand sat down on a crimson throne. The maiden who had been first in whiteand then in light blue, now wore only a smock, and stood beside thethrone with her hair down. She sang something mournfully, addressing thequeen, but the king waved his arm severely, and men and women with barelegs came in from both sides and began dancing all together. Then theviolins played very shrilly and merrily and one of the women with thickbare legs and thin arms, separating from the others, went behind thewings, adjusted her bodice, returned to the middle of the stage, andbegan jumping and striking one foot rapidly against the other. In thestalls everyone clapped and shouted "bravo!" Then one of the men wentinto a corner of the stage. The cymbals and horns in the orchestrastruck up more loudly, and this man with bare legs jumped very high andwaved his feet about very rapidly. (He was Duport, who received sixtythousand rubles a year for this art.) Everybody in the stalls, boxes,and galleries began clapping and shouting with all their might, and theman stopped and began smiling and bowing to all sides. Then other menand women danced with bare legs. Then the king again shouted to thesound of music, and they all began singing. But suddenly a storm cameon, chromatic scales and diminished sevenths were heard in theorchestra, everyone ran off, again dragging one of their number away,and the curtain dropped. Once more there was a terrible noise andclatter among the audience, and with rapturous faces everyone beganshouting: "Duport! Duport! Duport!" Natasha no longer thought thisstrange. She looked about with pleasure, smiling joyfully."Isn't Duport delightful?" Helene asked her."Oh, yes," replied Natasha.CHAPTER XDuring the entr'acte a whiff of cold air came into Helene's box, thedoor opened, and Anatole entered, stooping and trying not to brushagainst anyone."Let me introduce my brother to you," said Helene, her eyes shiftinguneasily from Natasha to Anatole.Natasha turned her pretty little head toward the elegant young officerand smiled at him over her bare shoulder. Anatole, who was as handsomeat close quarters as at a distance, sat down beside her and told her hehad long wished to have this happiness--ever since the Naryshkins' ballin fact, at which he had had the well-remembered pleasure of seeing her.Kuragin was much more sensible and simple with women than among men. Hetalked boldly and naturally, and Natasha was strangely and agreeablystruck by the fact that there was nothing formidable in this man aboutwhom there was so much talk, but that on the contrary his smile was mostnaive, cheerful, and good-natured.Kuragin asked her opinion of the performance and told her how at aprevious performance Semenova had fallen down on the stage."And do you know, Countess," he said, suddenly addressing her as an old,familiar acquaintance, "we are getting up a costume tournament; youought to take part in it! It will be great fun. We shall all meet at theKaragins'! Please come! No! Really, eh?" said he.While saying this he never removed his smiling eyes from her face, herneck, and her bare arms. Natasha knew for certain that he was enrapturedby her. This pleased her, yet his presence made her feel constrained andoppressed. When she was not looking at him she felt that he was lookingat her shoulders, and she involuntarily caught his eye so that he shouldlook into hers rather than this. But looking into his eyes she wasfrightened, realizing that there was not that barrier of modesty she hadalways felt between herself and other men. She did not know how it wasthat within five minutes she had come to feel herself terribly near tothis man. When she turned away she feared he might seize her from behindby her bare arm and kiss her on the neck. They spoke of most ordinarythings, yet she felt that they were closer to one another than she hadever been to any man. Natasha kept turning to Helene and to her father,as if asking what it all meant, but Helene was engaged in conversationwith a general and did not answer her look, and her father's eyes saidnothing but what they always said: "Having a good time? Well, I'm gladof it!"During one of these moments of awkward silence when Anatole's prominenteyes were gazing calmly and fixedly at her, Natasha, to break thesilence, asked him how he liked Moscow. She asked the question andblushed. She felt all the time that by talking to him she was doingsomething improper. Anatole smiled as though to encourage her."At first I did not like it much, because what makes a town pleasant cesont les jolies femmes, * isn't that so? But now I like it very muchindeed," he said, looking at her significantly. "You'll come to thecostume tournament, Countess? Do come!" and putting out his hand to herbouquet and dropping his voice, he added, "You will be the prettiestthere. Do come, dear countess, and give me this flower as a pledge!"* Are the pretty women.Natasha did not understand what he was saying any more than he didhimself, but she felt that his incomprehensible words had an improperintention. She did not know what to say and turned away as if she hadnot heard his remark. But as soon as she had turned away she felt thathe was there, behind, so close behind her."How is he now? Confused? Angry? Ought I to put it right?" she askedherself, and she could not refrain from turning round. She lookedstraight into his eyes, and his nearness, self-assurance, and the good-natured tenderness of his smile vanquished her. She smiled just as hewas doing, gazing straight into his eyes. And again she felt with horrorthat no barrier lay between him and her.The curtain rose again. Anatole left the box, serene and gay. Natashawent back to her father in the other box, now quite submissive to theworld she found herself in. All that was going on before her now seemedquite natural, but on the other hand all her previous thoughts of herbetrothed, of Princess Mary, or of life in the country did not oncerecur to her mind and were as if belonging to a remote past.In the fourth act there was some sort of devil who sang waving his armabout, till the boards were withdrawn from under him and he disappeareddown below. That was the only part of the fourth act that Natasha saw.She felt agitated and tormented, and the cause of this was Kuragin whomshe could not help watching. As they were leaving the theater Anatolecame up to them, called their carriage, and helped them in. As he wasputting Natasha in he pressed her arm above the elbow. Agitated andflushed she turned round. He was looking at her with glittering eyes,smiling tenderly.Only after she had reached home was Natasha able clearly to think overwhat had happened to her, and suddenly remembering Prince Andrew she washorrified, and at tea to which all had sat down after the opera, shegave a loud exclamation, flushed, and ran out of the room."O God! I am lost!" she said to herself. "How could I let him?" She satfor a long time hiding her flushed face in her hands trying to realizewhat had happened to her, but was unable either to understand what hadhappened or what she felt. Everything seemed dark, obscure, andterrible. There in that enormous, illuminated theater where the bare-legged Duport, in a tinsel-decorated jacket, jumped about to the musicon wet boards, and young girls and old men, and the nearly naked Helenewith her proud, calm smile, rapturously cried "bravo!"--there in thepresence of that Helene it had all seemed clear and simple; but now,alone by herself, it was incomprehensible. "What is it? What was thatterror I felt of him? What is this gnawing of conscience I am feelingnow?" she thought.Only to the old countess at night in bed could Natasha have told all shewas feeling. She knew that Sonya with her severe and simple views wouldeither not understand it at all or would be horrified at such aconfession. So Natasha tried to solve what was torturing her by herself."Am I spoiled for Andrew's love or not?" she asked herself, and withsoothing irony replied: "What a fool I am to ask that! What did happento me? Nothing! I have done nothing, I didn't lead him on at all. Nobodywill know and I shall never see him again," she told herself. "So it isplain that nothing has happened and there is nothing to repent of, andAndrew can love me still. But why 'still?' O God, why isn't he here?"Natasha quieted herself for a moment, but again some instinct told herthat though all this was true, and though nothing had happened, yet theformer purity of her love for Prince Andrew had perished. And again inimagination she went over her whole conversation with Kuragin, and againsaw the face, gestures, and tender smile of that bold handsome man whenhe pressed her arm.CHAPTER XIAnatole Kuragin was staying in Moscow because his father had sent himaway from Petersburg, where he had been spending twenty thousand rublesa year in cash, besides running up debts for as much more, which hiscreditors demanded from his father.His father announced to him that he would now pay half his debts for thelast time, but only on condition that he went to Moscow as adjutant tothe commander-in-chief--a post his father had procured for him--andwould at last try to make a good match there. He indicated to himPrincess Mary and Julie Karagina.Anatole consented and went to Moscow, where he put up at Pierre's house.Pierre received him unwillingly at first, but got used to him after awhile, sometimes even accompanied him on his carousals, and gave himmoney under the guise of loans.As Shinshin had remarked, from the time of his arrival Anatole hadturned the heads of the Moscow ladies, especially by the fact that heslighted them and plainly preferred the gypsy girls and Frenchactresses--with the chief of whom, Mademoiselle George, he was said tobe on intimate relations. He had never missed a carousal at Danilov's orother Moscow revelers', drank whole nights through, outvying everyoneelse, and was at all the balls and parties of the best society. Therewas talk of his intrigues with some of the ladies, and he flirted with afew of them at the balls. But he did not run after the unmarried girls,especially the rich heiresses who were most of them plain. There was aspecial reason for this, as he had got married two years before--a factknown only to his most intimate friends. At that time while with hisregiment in Poland, a Polish landowner of small means had forced him tomarry his daughter. Anatole had very soon abandoned his wife and, for apayment which he agreed to send to his father-in-law, had arranged to befree to pass himself off as a bachelor.Anatole was always content with his position, with himself, and withothers. He was instinctively and thoroughly convinced that it wasimpossible for him to live otherwise than as he did and that he hadnever in his life done anything base. He was incapable of consideringhow his actions might affect others or what the consequences of this orthat action of his might be. He was convinced that, as a duck is so madethat it must live in water, so God had made him such that he must spendthirty thousand rubles a year and always occupy a prominent position insociety. He believed this so firmly that others, looking at him, werepersuaded of it too and did not refuse him either a leading place insociety or money, which he borrowed from anyone and everyone andevidently would not repay.He was not a gambler, at any rate he did not care about winning. He wasnot vain. He did not mind what people thought of him. Still less couldhe be accused of ambition. More than once he had vexed his father byspoiling his own career, and he laughed at distinctions of all kinds. Hewas not mean, and did not refuse anyone who asked of him. All he caredabout was gaiety and women, and as according to his ideas there wasnothing dishonorable in these tastes, and he was incapable ofconsidering what the gratification of his tastes entailed for others, hehonestly considered himself irreproachable, sincerely despised roguesand bad people, and with a tranquil conscience carried his head high.Rakes, those male Magdalenes, have a secret feeling of innocence similarto that which female Magdalenes have, based on the same hope offorgiveness. "All will be forgiven her, for she loved much; and all willbe forgiven him, for he enjoyed much."Dolokhov, who had reappeared that year in Moscow after his exile and hisPersian adventures, and was leading a life of luxury, gambling, anddissipation, associated with his old Petersburg comrade Kuragin and madeuse of him for his own ends.Anatole was sincerely fond of Dolokhov for his cleverness and audacity.Dolokhov, who needed Anatole Kuragin's name, position, and connectionsas a bait to draw rich young men into his gambling set, made use of himand amused himself at his expense without letting the other feel it.Apart from the advantage he derived from Anatole, the very process ofdominating another's will was in itself a pleasure, a habit, and anecessity to Dolokhov.Natasha had made a strong impression on Kuragin. At supper after theopera he described to Dolokhov with the air of a connoisseur theattractions of her arms, shoulders, feet, and hair and expressed hisintention of making love to her. Anatole had no notion and was incapableof considering what might come of such love-making, as he never had anynotion of the outcome of any of his actions."She's first-rate, my dear fellow, but not for us," replied Dolokhov."I will tell my sister to ask her to dinner," said Anatole. "Eh?""You'd better wait till she's married....""You know, I adore little girls, they lose their heads at once," pursuedAnatole."You have been caught once already by a 'little girl,'" said Dolokhovwho knew of Kuragin's marriage. "Take care!""Well, that can't happen twice! Eh?" said Anatole, with a good-humoredlaugh.CHAPTER XIIThe day after the opera the Rostovs went nowhere and nobody came to seethem. Marya Dmitrievna talked to the count about something which theyconcealed from Natasha. Natasha guessed they were talking about the oldprince and planning something, and this disquieted and offended her. Shewas expecting Prince Andrew any moment and twice that day sent amanservant to the Vozdvizhenka to ascertain whether he had come. He hadnot arrived. She suffered more now than during her first days in Moscow.To her impatience and pining for him were now added the unpleasantrecollection of her interview with Princess Mary and the old prince, anda fear and anxiety of which she did not understand the cause. Shecontinually fancied that either he would never come or that somethingwould happen to her before he came. She could no longer think of him byherself calmly and continuously as she had done before. As soon as shebegan to think of him, the recollection of the old prince, of PrincessMary, of the theater, and of Kuragin mingled with her thoughts. Thequestion again presented itself whether she was not guilty, whether shehad not already broken faith with Prince Andrew, and again she foundherself recalling to the minutest detail every word, every gesture, andevery shade in the play of expression on the face of the man who hadbeen able to arouse in her such an incomprehensible and terrifyingfeeling. To the family Natasha seemed livelier than usual, but she wasfar less tranquil and happy than before.On Sunday morning Marya Dmitrievna invited her visitors to Mass at herparish church--the Church of the Assumption built over the graves ofvictims of the plague."I don't like those fashionable churches," she said, evidently pridingherself on her independence of thought. "God is the same every where. Wehave an excellent priest, he conducts the service decently and withdignity, and the deacon is the same. What holiness is there in givingconcerts in the choir? I don't like it, it's just self-indulgence!"Marya Dmitrievna liked Sundays and knew how to keep them. Her wholehouse was scrubbed and cleaned on Saturdays; neither she nor theservants worked, and they all wore holiday dress and went to church. Ather table there were extra dishes at dinner, and the servants had vodkaand roast goose or suckling pig. But in nothing in the house was theholiday so noticeable as in Marya Dmitrievna's broad, stern face, whichon that day wore an invariable look of solemn festivity.After Mass, when they had finished their coffee in the dining room wherethe loose covers had been removed from the furniture, a servantannounced that the carriage was ready, and Marya Dmitrievna rose with astern air. She wore her holiday shawl, in which she paid calls, andannounced that she was going to see Prince Nicholas Bolkonski to have anexplanation with him about Natasha.After she had gone, a dressmaker from Madame Suppert-Roguet waited onthe Rostovs, and Natasha, very glad of this diversion, having shutherself into a room adjoining the drawing room, occupied herself tryingon the new dresses. Just as she had put on a bodice without sleeves andonly tacked together, and was turning her head to see in the glass howthe back fitted, she heard in the drawing room the animated sounds ofher father's voice and another's--a woman's--that made her flush. It wasHelene. Natasha had not time to take off the bodice before the dooropened and Countess Bezukhova, dressed in a purple velvet gown with ahigh collar, came into the room beaming with good-humored amiablesmiles."Oh, my enchantress!" she cried to the blushing Natasha. "Charming! No,this is really beyond anything, my dear count," said she to Count Rostovwho had followed her in. "How can you live in Moscow and go nowhere? No,I won't let you off! Mademoiselle George will recite at my house tonightand there'll be some people, and if you don't bring your lovely girls--who are prettier than Mademoiselle George--I won't know you! My husbandis away in Tver or I would send him to fetch you. You must come. Youpositively must! Between eight and nine."She nodded to the dressmaker, whom she knew and who had curtsiedrespectfully to her, and seated herself in an armchair beside thelooking glass, draping the folds of her velvet dress picturesquely. Shedid not cease chattering good-naturedly and gaily, continually praisingNatasha's beauty. She looked at Natasha's dresses and praised them, aswell as a new dress of her own made of "metallic gauze," which she hadreceived from Paris, and advised Natasha to have one like it."But anything suits you, my charmer!" she remarked.A smile of pleasure never left Natasha's face. She felt happy and as ifshe were blossoming under the praise of this dear Countess Bezukhova whohad formerly seemed to her so unapproachable and important and was nowso kind to her. Natasha brightened up and felt almost in love with thiswoman, who was so beautiful and so kind. Helene for her part wassincerely delighted with Natasha and wished to give her a good time.Anatole had asked her to bring him and Natasha together, and she wascalling on the Rostovs for that purpose. The idea of throwing herbrother and Natasha together amused her.Though at one time, in Petersburg, she had been annoyed with Natasha fordrawing Boris away, she did not think of that now, and in her own wayheartily wished Natasha well. As she was leaving the Rostovs she calledher protegee aside."My brother dined with me yesterday--we nearly died of laughter--he atenothing and kept sighing for you, my charmer! He is madly, quite madly,in love with you, my dear."Natasha blushed scarlet when she heard this."How she blushes, how she blushes, my pretty!" said Helene. "You mustcertainly come. If you love somebody, my charmer, that is not a reasonto shut yourself up. Even if you are engaged, I am sure your fiancewould wish you to go into society rather than be bored to death.""So she knows I am engaged, and she and her husband Pierre--that goodPierre--have talked and laughed about this. So it's all right." Andagain, under Helene's influence, what had seemed terrible now seemedsimple and natural. "And she is such a grande dame, so kind, andevidently likes me so much. And why not enjoy myself?" thought Natasha,gazing at Helene with wide-open, wondering eyes.Marya Dmitrievna came back to dinner taciturn and serious, havingevidently suffered a defeat at the old prince's. She was still tooagitated by the encounter to be able to talk of the affair calmly. Inanswer to the count's inquiries she replied that things were all rightand that she would tell about it next day. On hearing of CountessBezukhova's visit and the invitation for that evening, Marya Dmitrievnaremarked:"I don't care to have anything to do with Bezukhova and don't advise youto; however, if you've promised--go. It will divert your thoughts," sheadded, addressing Natasha.CHAPTER XIIICount Rostov took the girls to Countess Bezukhova's. There were a goodmany people there, but nearly all strangers to Natasha. Count Rostov wasdispleased to see that the company consisted almost entirely of men andwomen known for the freedom of their conduct. Mademoiselle George wasstanding in a corner of the drawing room surrounded by young men. Therewere several Frenchmen present, among them Metivier who from the timeHelene reached Moscow had been an intimate in her house. The countdecided not to sit down to cards or let his girls out of his sight andto get away as soon as Mademoiselle George's performance was over.Anatole was at the door, evidently on the lookout for the Rostovs.Immediately after greeting the count he went up to Natasha and followedher. As soon as she saw him she was seized by the same feeling she hadhad at the opera--gratified vanity at his admiration of her and fear atthe absence of a moral barrier between them.Helene welcomed Natasha delightedly and was loud in admiration of herbeauty and her dress. Soon after their arrival Mademoiselle George wentout of the room to change her costume. In the drawing room people beganarranging the chairs and taking their seats. Anatole moved a chair forNatasha and was about to sit down beside her, but the count, who neverlost sight of her, took the seat himself. Anatole sat down behind her.Mademoiselle George, with her bare, fat, dimpled arms, and a red shawldraped over one shoulder, came into the space left vacant for her, andassumed an unnatural pose. Enthusiastic whispering was audible.Mademoiselle George looked sternly and gloomily at the audience andbegan reciting some French verses describing her guilty love for herson. In some places she raised her voice, in others she whispered,lifting her head triumphantly; sometimes she paused and uttered hoarsesounds, rolling her eyes."Adorable! divine! delicious!" was heard from every side.Natasha looked at the fat actress, but neither saw nor heard norunderstood anything of what went on before her. She only felt herselfagain completely borne away into this strange senseless world--so remotefrom her old world--a world in which it was impossible to know what wasgood or bad, reasonable or senseless. Behind her sat Anatole, andconscious of his proximity she experienced a frightened sense ofexpectancy.After the first monologue the whole company rose and surroundedMademoiselle George, expressing their enthusiasm."How beautiful she is!" Natasha remarked to her father who had alsorisen and was moving through the crowd toward the actress."I don't think so when I look at you!" said Anatole, following Natasha.He said this at a moment when she alone could hear him. "You areenchanting... from the moment I saw you I have never ceased...""Come, come, Natasha!" said the count, as he turned back for hisdaughter. "How beautiful she is!" Natasha without saying anythingstepped up to her father and looked at him with surprised inquiringeyes.After giving several recitations, Mademoiselle George left, and CountessBezukhova asked her visitors into the ballroom.The count wished to go home, but Helene entreated him not to spoil herimprovised ball, and the Rostovs stayed on. Anatole asked Natasha for avalse and as they danced he pressed her waist and hand and told her shewas bewitching and that he loved her. During the ecossaise, which shealso danced with him, Anatole said nothing when they happened to be bythemselves, but merely gazed at her. Natasha lifted her frightened eyesto him, but there was such confident tenderness in his affectionate lookand smile that she could not, whilst looking at him, say what she had tosay. She lowered her eyes."Don't say such things to me. I am betrothed and love another," she saidrapidly.... She glanced at him.Anatole was not upset or pained by what she had said."Don't speak to me of that! What can I do?" said he. "I tell you I ammadly, madly, in love with you! Is it my fault that you areenchanting?... It's our turn to begin."Natasha, animated and excited, looked about her with wide-openfrightened eyes and seemed merrier than usual. She understood hardlyanything that went on that evening. They danced the ecossaise and theGrossvater. Her father asked her to come home, but she begged to remain.Wherever she went and whomever she was speaking to, she felt his eyesupon her. Later on she recalled how she had asked her father to let hergo to the dressing room to rearrange her dress, that Helene had followedher and spoken laughingly of her brother's love, and that she again metAnatole in the little sitting room. Helene had disappeared leaving themalone, and Anatole had taken her hand and said in a tender voice:"I cannot come to visit you but is it possible that I shall never seeyou? I love you madly. Can I never...?" and, blocking her path, hebrought his face close to hers.His large, glittering, masculine eyes were so close to hers that she sawnothing but them."Natalie?" he whispered inquiringly while she felt her hands beingpainfully pressed. "Natalie?""I don't understand. I have nothing to say," her eyes replied.Burning lips were pressed to hers, and at the same instant she feltherself released, and Helene's footsteps and the rustle of her dresswere heard in the room. Natasha looked round at her, and then, red andtrembling, threw a frightened look of inquiry at Anatole and movedtoward the door."One word, just one, for God's sake!" cried Anatole.She paused. She so wanted a word from him that would explain to her whathad happened and to which she could find no answer."Natalie, just a word, only one!" he kept repeating, evidently notknowing what to say and he repeated it till Helene came up to them.Helene returned with Natasha to the drawing room. The Rostovs went awaywithout staying for supper.After reaching home Natasha did not sleep all night. She was tormentedby the insoluble question whether she loved Anatole or Prince Andrew.She loved Prince Andrew--she remembered distinctly how deeply she lovedhim. But she also loved Anatole, of that there was no doubt. "Else howcould all this have happened?" thought she. "If, after that, I couldreturn his smile when saying good-by, if I was able to let it come tothat, it means that I loved him from the first. It means that he iskind, noble, and splendid, and I could not help loving him. What am I todo if I love him and the other one too?" she asked herself, unable tofind an answer to these terrible questions.CHAPTER XIVMorning came with its cares and bustle. Everyone got up and began tomove about and talk, dressmakers came again. Marya Dmitrievna appeared,and they were called to breakfast. Natasha kept looking uneasily ateverybody with wide-open eyes, as if wishing to intercept every glancedirected toward her, and tried to appear the same as usual.After breakfast, which was her best time, Marya Dmitrievna sat down inher armchair and called Natasha and the count to her."Well, friends, I have now thought the whole matter over and this is myadvice," she began. "Yesterday, as you know, I went to see PrinceBolkonski. Well, I had a talk with him.... He took it into his head tobegin shouting, but I am not one to be shouted down. I said what I hadto say!""Well, and he?" asked the count."He? He's crazy... he did not want to listen. But what's the use oftalking? As it is we have worn the poor girl out," said MaryaDmitrievna. "My advice to you is finish your business and go back hometo Otradnoe... and wait there.""Oh, no!" exclaimed Natasha."Yes, go back," said Marya Dmitrievna, "and wait there. If yourbetrothed comes here now--there will be no avoiding a quarrel; but alonewith the old man he will talk things over and then come on to you."Count Rostov approved of this suggestion, appreciating itsreasonableness. If the old man came round it would be all the better tovisit him in Moscow or at Bald Hills later on; and if not, the wedding,against his wishes, could only be arranged at Otradnoe."That is perfectly true. And I am sorry I went to see him and took her,"said the old count."No, why be sorry? Being here, you had to pay your respects. But if hewon't--that's his affair," said Marya Dmitrievna, looking for somethingin her reticule. "Besides, the trousseau is ready, so there is nothingto wait for; and what is not ready I'll send after you. Though I don'tlike letting you go, it is the best way. So go, with God's blessing!"Having found what she was looking for in the reticule she handed it toNatasha. It was a letter from Princess Mary."She has written to you. How she torments herself, poor thing! She'safraid you might think that she does not like you.""But she doesn't like me," said Natasha."Don't talk nonsense!" cried Marya Dmitrievna."I shan't believe anyone, I know she doesn't like me," replied Natashaboldly as she took the letter, and her face expressed a cold and angryresolution that caused Marya Dmitrievna to look at her more intently andto frown."Don't answer like that, my good girl!" she said. "What I say is true!Write an answer!" Natasha did not reply and went to her own room to readPrincess Mary's letter.Princess Mary wrote that she was in despair at the misunderstanding thathad occurred between them. Whatever her father's feelings might be, shebegged Natasha to believe that she could not help loving her as the onechosen by her brother, for whose happiness she was ready to sacrificeeverything."Do not think, however," she wrote, "that my father is ill-disposedtoward you. He is an invalid and an old man who must be forgiven; but heis good and magnanimous and will love her who makes his son happy."Princess Mary went on to ask Natasha to fix a time when she could seeher again.After reading the letter Natasha sat down at the writing table to answerit. "Dear Princess," she wrote in French quickly and mechanically, andthen paused. What more could she write after all that had happened theevening before? "Yes, yes! All that has happened, and now all ischanged," she thought as she sat with the letter she had begun beforeher. "Must I break off with him? Must I really? That's awful..." and toescape from these dreadful thoughts she went to Sonya and began sortingpatterns with her.After dinner Natasha went to her room and again took up Princess Mary'sletter. "Can it be that it is all over?" she thought. "Can it be thatall this has happened so quickly and has destroyed all that wentbefore?" She recalled her love for Prince Andrew in all its formerstrength, and at the same time felt that she loved Kuragin. She vividlypictured herself as Prince Andrew's wife, and the scenes of happinesswith him she had so often repeated in her imagination, and at the sametime, aglow with excitement, recalled every detail of yesterday'sinterview with Anatole."Why could that not be as well?" she sometimes asked herself in completebewilderment. "Only so could I be completely happy; but now I have tochoose, and I can't be happy without either of them. Only," she thought,"to tell Prince Andrew what has happened or to hide it from him are bothequally impossible. But with that one nothing is spoiled. But am Ireally to abandon forever the joy of Prince Andrew's love, in which Ihave lived so long?""Please, Miss!" whispered a maid entering the room with a mysteriousair. "A man told me to give you this-" and she handed Natasha a letter."Only, for Christ's sake..." the girl went on, as Natasha, withoutthinking, mechanically broke the seal and read a love letter fromAnatole, of which, without taking in a word, she understood only that itwas a letter from him--from the man she loved. Yes, she loved him, orelse how could that have happened which had happened? And how could shehave a love letter from him in her hand?With trembling hands Natasha held that passionate love letter whichDolokhov had composed for Anatole, and as she read it she found in it anecho of all that she herself imagined she was feeling."Since yesterday evening my fate has been sealed; to be loved by you orto die. There is no other way for me," the letter began. Then he went onto say that he knew her parents would not give her to him--for thisthere were secret reasons he could reveal only to her--but that if sheloved him she need only say the word yes, and no human power couldhinder their bliss. Love would conquer all. He would steal her away andcarry her off to the ends of the earth."Yes, yes! I love him!" thought Natasha, reading the letter for thetwentieth time and finding some peculiarly deep meaning in each word ofit.That evening Marya Dmitrievna was going to the Akharovs' and proposed totake the girls with her. Natasha, pleading a headache, remained at home.CHAPTER XVOn returning late in the evening Sonya went to Natasha's room, and toher surprise found her still dressed and asleep on the sofa. Open on thetable, beside her lay Anatole's letter. Sonya picked it up and read it.As she read she glanced at the sleeping Natasha, trying to find in herface an explanation of what she was reading, but did not find it. Herface was calm, gentle, and happy. Clutching her breast to keep herselffrom choking, Sonya, pale and trembling with fear and agitation, satdown in an armchair and burst into tears."How was it I noticed nothing? How could it go so far? Can she have leftoff loving Prince Andrew? And how could she let Kuragin go to suchlengths? He is a deceiver and a villain, that's plain! What willNicholas, dear noble Nicholas, do when he hears of it? So this is themeaning of her excited, resolute, unnatural look the day beforeyesterday, yesterday, and today," thought Sonya. "But it can't be thatshe loves him! She probably opened the letter without knowing who it wasfrom. Probably she is offended by it. She could not do such a thing!"Sonya wiped away her tears and went up to Natasha, again scanning herface."Natasha!" she said, just audibly.Natasha awoke and saw Sonya."Ah, you're back?"And with the decision and tenderness that often come at the moment ofawakening, she embraced her friend, but noticing Sonya's look ofembarrassment, her own face expressed confusion and suspicion."Sonya, you've read that letter?" she demanded."Yes," answered Sonya softly.Natasha smiled rapturously."No, Sonya, I can't any longer!" she said. "I can't hide it from you anylonger. You know, we love one another! Sonya, darling, he writes...Sonya..."Sonya stared open-eyed at Natasha, unable to believe her ears."And Bolkonski?" she asked."Ah, Sonya, if you only knew how happy I am!" cried Natasha. "You don'tknow what love is....""But, Natasha, can that be all over?"Natasha looked at Sonya with wide-open eyes as if she could not graspthe question."Well, then, are you refusing Prince Andrew?" said Sonya."Oh, you don't understand anything! Don't talk nonsense, just listen!"said Natasha, with momentary vexation."But I can't believe it," insisted Sonya. "I don't understand. How is ityou have loved a man for a whole year and suddenly... Why, you have onlyseen him three times! Natasha, I don't believe you, you're joking! Inthree days to forget everything and so...""Three days?" said Natasha. "It seems to me I've loved him a hundredyears. It seems to me that I have never loved anyone before. You can'tunderstand it.... Sonya, wait a bit, sit here," and Natasha embraced andkissed her."I had heard that it happens like this, and you must have heard it too,but it's only now that I feel such love. It's not the same as before. Assoon as I saw him I felt he was my master and I his slave, and that Icould not help loving him. Yes, his slave! Whatever he orders I shalldo. You don't understand that. What can I do? What can I do, Sonya?"cried Natasha with a happy yet frightened expression."But think what you are doing," cried Sonya. "I can't leave it likethis. This secret correspondence... How could you let him go so far?"she went on, with a horror and disgust she could hardly conceal."I told you that I have no will," Natasha replied. "Why can't youunderstand? I love him!""Then I won't let it come to that... I shall tell!" cried Sonya,bursting into tears."What do you mean? For God's sake... If you tell, you are my enemy!"declared Natasha. "You want me to be miserable, you want us to beseparated...."When she saw Natasha's fright, Sonya shed tears of shame and pity forher friend."But what has happened between you?" she asked. "What has he said toyou? Why doesn't he come to the house?"Natasha did not answer her questions."For God's sake, Sonya, don't tell anyone, don't torture me," Natashaentreated. "Remember no one ought to interfere in such matters! I haveconfided in you....""But why this secrecy? Why doesn't he come to the house?" asked Sonya."Why doesn't he openly ask for your hand? You know Prince Andrew gaveyou complete freedom--if it is really so; but I don't believe it!Natasha, have you considered what these secret reasons can be?"Natasha looked at Sonya with astonishment. Evidently this questionpresented itself to her mind for the first time and she did not know howto answer it."I don't know what the reasons are. But there must be reasons!"Sonya sighed and shook her head incredulously."If there were reasons..." she began.But Natasha, guessing her doubts, interrupted her in alarm."Sonya, one can't doubt him! One can't, one can't! Don't youunderstand?" she cried."Does he love you?""Does he love me?" Natasha repeated with a smile of pity at her friend'slack of comprehension. "Why, you have read his letter and you have seenhim.""But if he is dishonorable?""He! dishonorable? If you only knew!" exclaimed Natasha."If he is an honorable man he should either declare his intentions orcease seeing you; and if you won't do this, I will. I will write to him,and I will tell Papa!" said Sonya resolutely."But I can't live without him!" cried Natasha."Natasha, I don't understand you. And what are you saying! Think of yourfather and of Nicholas.""I don't want anyone, I don't love anyone but him. How dare you say heis dishonorable? Don't you know that I love him?" screamed Natasha. "Goaway, Sonya! I don't want to quarrel with you, but go, for God's sakego! You see how I am suffering!" Natasha cried angrily, in a voice ofdespair and repressed irritation. Sonya burst into sobs and ran from theroom.Natasha went to the table and without a moment's reflection wrote thatanswer to Princess Mary which she had been unable to write all themorning. In this letter she said briefly that all theirmisunderstandings were at an end; that availing herself of themagnanimity of Prince Andrew who when he went abroad had given her herfreedom, she begged Princess Mary to forget everything and forgive herif she had been to blame toward her, but that she could not be his wife.At that moment this all seemed quite easy, simple, and clear to Natasha.On Friday the Rostovs were to return to the country, but on Wednesdaythe count went with the prospective purchaser to his estate near Moscow.On the day the count left, Sonya and Natasha were invited to a bigdinner party at the Karagins', and Marya Dmitrievna took them there. Atthat party Natasha again met Anatole, and Sonya noticed that she spoketo him, trying not to be overheard, and that all through dinner she wasmore agitated than ever. When they got home Natasha was the first tobegin the explanation Sonya expected."There, Sonya, you were talking all sorts of nonsense about him,"Natasha began in a mild voice such as children use when they wish to bepraised. "We have had an explanation today.""Well, what happened? What did he say? Natasha, how glad I am you're notangry with me! Tell me everything--the whole truth. What did he say?"Natasha became thoughtful."Oh, Sonya, if you knew him as I do! He said... He asked me what I hadpromised Bolkonski. He was glad I was free to refuse him."Sonya sighed sorrowfully."But you haven't refused Bolkonski?" said she."Perhaps I have. Perhaps all is over between me and Bolkonski. Why doyou think so badly of me?""I don't think anything, only I don't understand this...""Wait a bit, Sonya, you'll understand everything. You'll see what a manhe is! Now don't think badly of me or of him. I don't think badly ofanyone: I love and pity everybody. But what am I to do?"Sonya did not succumb to the tender tone Natasha used toward her. Themore emotional and ingratiating the expression of Natasha's face became,the more serious and stern grew Sonya's."Natasha," said she, "you asked me not to speak to you, and I haven'tspoken, but now you yourself have begun. I don't trust him, Natasha. Whythis secrecy?""Again, again!" interrupted Natasha."Natasha, I am afraid for you!""Afraid of what?""I am afraid you're going to your ruin," said Sonya resolutely, and washerself horrified at what she had said.Anger again showed in Natasha's face."And I'll go to my ruin, I will, as soon as possible! It's not yourbusiness! It won't be you, but I, who'll suffer. Leave me alone, leaveme alone! I hate you!""Natasha!" moaned Sonya, aghast."I hate you, I hate you! You're my enemy forever!" And Natasha ran outof the room.Natasha did not speak to Sonya again and avoided her. With the sameexpression of agitated surprise and guilt she went about the house,taking up now one occupation, now another, and at once abandoning them.Hard as it was for Sonya, she watched her friend and did not let her outof her sight.The day before the count was to return, Sonya noticed that Natasha satby the drawing-room window all the morning as if expecting something andthat she made a sign to an officer who drove past, whom Sonya took to beAnatole.Sonya began watching her friend still more attentively and noticed thatat dinner and all that evening Natasha was in a strange and unnaturalstate. She answered questions at random, began sentences she did notfinish, and laughed at everything.After tea Sonya noticed a housemaid at Natasha's door timidly waiting tolet her pass. She let the girl go in, and then listening at the doorlearned that another letter had been delivered.Then suddenly it became clear to Sonya that Natasha had some dreadfulplan for that evening. Sonya knocked at her door. Natasha did not lether in."She will run away with him!" thought Sonya. "She is capable ofanything. There was something particularly pathetic and resolute in herface today. She cried as she said good-by to Uncle," Sonya remembered."Yes, that's it, she means to elope with him, but what am I to do?"thought she, recalling all the signs that clearly indicated that Natashahad some terrible intention. "The count is away. What am I to do? Writeto Kuragin demanding an explanation? But what is there to oblige him toreply? Write to Pierre, as Prince Andrew asked me to in case of somemisfortune?... But perhaps she really has already refused Bolkonski--shesent a letter to Princess Mary yesterday. And Uncle is away...." To tellMarya Dmitrievna who had such faith in Natasha seemed to Sonya terrible."Well, anyway," thought Sonya as she stood in the dark passage, "now ornever I must prove that I remember the family's goodness to me and thatI love Nicholas. Yes! If I don't sleep for three nights I'll not leavethis passage and will hold her back by force and will and not let thefamily be disgraced," thought she.CHAPTER XVIAnatole had lately moved to Dolokhov's. The plan for Natalie Rostova'sabduction had been arranged and the preparations made by Dolokhov a fewdays before, and on the day that Sonya, after listening at Natasha'sdoor, resolved to safeguard her, it was to have been put into execution.Natasha had promised to come out to Kuragin at the back porch at tenthat evening. Kuragin was to put her into a troyka he would have readyand to drive her forty miles to the village of Kamenka, where anunfrocked priest was in readiness to perform a marriage ceremony overthem. At Kamenka a relay of horses was to wait which would take them tothe Warsaw highroad, and from there they would hasten abroad with posthorses.Anatole had a passport, an order for post horses, ten thousand rubles hehad taken from his sister and another ten thousand borrowed withDolokhov's help.Two witnesses for the mock marriage--Khvostikov, a retired pettyofficial whom Dolokhov made use of in his gambling transactions, andMakarin, a retired hussar, a kindly, weak fellow who had an unboundedaffection for Kuragin--were sitting at tea in Dolokhov's front room.In his large study, the walls of which were hung to the ceiling withPersian rugs, bearskins, and weapons, sat Dolokhov in a traveling cloakand high boots, at an open desk on which lay abacus and some bundles ofpaper money. Anatole, with uniform unbuttoned, walked to and fro fromthe room where the witnesses were sitting, through the study to the roombehind, where his French valet and others were packing the last of histhings. Dolokhov was counting the money and noting something down."Well," he said, "Khvostikov must have two thousand.""Give it to him, then," said Anatole."Makarka" (their name for Makarin) "will go through fire and water foryou for nothing. So here are our accounts all settled," said Dolokhov,showing him the memorandum. "Is that right?""Yes, of course," returned Anatole, evidently not listening to Dolokhovand looking straight before him with a smile that did not leave hisface.Dolokhov banged down the lid of his desk and turned to Anatole with anironic smile:"Do you know? You'd really better drop it all. There's still time!""Fool," retorted Anatole. "Don't talk nonsense! If you only knew... it'sthe devil knows what!""No, really, give it up!" said Dolokhov. "I am speaking seriously. It'sno joke, this plot you've hatched.""What, teasing again? Go to the devil! Eh?" said Anatole, making agrimace. "Really it's no time for your stupid jokes," and he left theroom.Dolokhov smiled contemptuously and condescendingly when Anatole had goneout."You wait a bit," he called after him. "I'm not joking, I'm talkingsense. Come here, come here!"Anatole returned and looked at Dolokhov, trying to give him hisattention and evidently submitting to him involuntarily."Now listen to me. I'm telling you this for the last time. Why should Ijoke about it? Did I hinder you? Who arranged everything for you? Whofound the priest and got the passport? Who raised the money? I did itall.""Well, thank you for it. Do you think I am not grateful?" And Anatolesighed and embraced Dolokhov."I helped you, but all the same I must tell you the truth; it is adangerous business, and if you think about it--a stupid business. Well,you'll carry her off--all right! Will they let it stop at that? It willcome out that you're already married. Why, they'll have you in thecriminal court....""Oh, nonsense, nonsense!" Anatole ejaculated and again made a grimace."Didn't I explain to you? What?" And Anatole, with the partiality dull-witted people have for any conclusion they have reached by their ownreasoning, repeated the argument he had already put to Dolokhov ahundred times. "Didn't I explain to you that I have come to thisconclusion: if this marriage is invalid," he went on, crooking onefinger, "then I have nothing to answer for; but if it is valid, nomatter! Abroad no one will know anything about it. Isn't that so? Anddon't talk to me, don't, don't.""Seriously, you'd better drop it! You'll only get yourself into a mess!""Go to the devil!" cried Anatole and, clutching his hair, left the room,but returned at once and dropped into an armchair in front of Dolokhovwith his feet turned under him. "It's the very devil! What? Feel how itbeats!" He took Dolokhov's hand and put it on his heart. "What a foot,my dear fellow! What a glance! A goddess!" he added in French. "What?"Dolokhov with a cold smile and a gleam in his handsome insolent eyeslooked at him--evidently wishing to get some more amusement out of him."Well and when the money's gone, what then?""What then? Eh?" repeated Anatole, sincerely perplexed by a thought ofthe future. "What then?... Then, I don't know.... But why talknonsense!" He glanced at his watch. "It's time!"Anatole went into the back room."Now then! Nearly ready? You're dawdling!" he shouted to the servants.Dolokhov put away the money, called a footman whom he ordered to bringsomething for them to eat and drink before the journey, and went intothe room where Khvostikov and Makarin were sitting.Anatole lay on the sofa in the study leaning on his elbow and smilingpensively, while his handsome lips muttered tenderly to himself."Come and eat something. Have a drink!" Dolokhov shouted to him from theother room."I don't want to," answered Anatole continuing to smile."Come! Balaga is here."Anatole rose and went into the dining room. Balaga was a famous troykadriver who had known Dolokhov and Anatole some six years and had giventhem good service with his troykas. More than once when Anatole'sregiment was stationed at Tver he had taken him from Tver in theevening, brought him to Moscow by daybreak, and driven him back againthe next night. More than once he had enabled Dolokhov to escape whenpursued. More than once he had driven them through the town with gypsiesand "ladykins" as he called the cocottes. More than once in theirservice he had run over pedestrians and upset vehicles in the streets ofMoscow and had always been protected from the consequences by "mygentlemen" as he called them. He had ruined more than one horse in theirservice. More than once they had beaten him, and more than once they hadmade him drunk on champagne and Madeira, which he loved; and he knewmore than one thing about each of them which would long ago have sent anordinary man to Siberia. They often called Balaga into their orgies andmade him drink and dance at the gypsies', and more than one thousandrubles of their money had passed through his hands. In their service herisked his skin and his life twenty times a year, and in their servicehad lost more horses than the money he had from them would buy. But heliked them; liked that mad driving at twelve miles an hour, likedupsetting a driver or running down a pedestrian, and flying at fullgallop through the Moscow streets. He liked to hear those wild, tipsyshouts behind him: "Get on! Get on!" when it was impossible to go anyfaster. He liked giving a painful lash on the neck to some peasant who,more dead than alive, was already hurrying out of his way. "Realgentlemen!" he considered them.Anatole and Dolokhov liked Balaga too for his masterly driving andbecause he liked the things they liked. With others Balaga bargained,charging twenty-five rubles for a two hours' drive, and rarely drovehimself, generally letting his young men do so. But with "his gentlemen"he always drove himself and never demanded anything for his work. Only acouple of times a year--when he knew from their valets that they hadmoney in hand--he would turn up of a morning quite sober and with a deepbow would ask them to help him. The gentlemen always made him sit down."Do help me out, Theodore Ivanych, sir," or "your excellency," he wouldsay. "I am quite out of horses. Let me have what you can to go to thefair."And Anatole and Dolokhov, when they had money, would give him a thousandor a couple of thousand rubles.Balaga was a fair-haired, short, and snub-nosed peasant of about twenty-seven; red-faced, with a particularly red thick neck, glittering littleeyes, and a small beard. He wore a fine, dark-blue, silk-lined clothcoat over a sheepskin.On entering the room now he crossed himself, turning toward the frontcorner of the room, and went up to Dolokhov, holding out a small, blackhand."Theodore Ivanych!" he said, bowing."How d'you do, friend? Well, here he is!""Good day, your excellency!" he said, again holding out his hand toAnatole who had just come in."I say, Balaga," said Anatole, putting his hands on the man's shoulders,"do you care for me or not? Eh? Now, do me a service.... What horseshave you come with? Eh?""As your messenger ordered, your special beasts," replied Balaga."Well, listen, Balaga! Drive all three to death but get me there inthree hours. Eh?""When they are dead, what shall I drive?" said Balaga with a wink."Mind, I'll smash your face in! Don't make jokes!" cried Anatole,suddenly rolling his eyes."Why joke?" said the driver, laughing. "As if I'd grudge my gentlemenanything! As fast as ever the horses can gallop, so fast we'll go!""Ah!" said Anatole. "Well, sit down.""Yes, sit down!" said Dolokhov."I'll stand, Theodore Ivanych.""Sit down; nonsense! Have a drink!" said Anatole, and filled a largeglass of Madeira for him.The driver's eyes sparkled at the sight of the wine. After refusing itfor manners' sake, he drank it and wiped his mouth with a red silkhandkerchief he took out of his cap."And when are we to start, your excellency?""Well..." Anatole looked at his watch. "We'll start at once. Mind,Balaga! You'll get there in time? Eh?""That depends on our luck in starting, else why shouldn't we be there intime?" replied Balaga. "Didn't we get you to Tver in seven hours? Ithink you remember that, your excellency?""Do you know, one Christmas I drove from Tver," said Anatole, smilinglyat the recollection and turning to Makarin who gazed rapturously at himwith wide-open eyes. "Will you believe it, Makarka, it took one's breathaway, the rate we flew. We came across a train of loaded sleighs anddrove right over two of them. Eh?""Those were horses!" Balaga continued the tale. "That time I'd harnessedtwo young side horses with the bay in the shafts," he went on, turningto Dolokhov. "Will you believe it, Theodore Ivanych, those animals flewforty miles? I couldn't hold them in, my hands grew numb in the sharpfrost so that I threw down the reins--'Catch hold yourself, yourexcellency!' says I, and I just tumbled on the bottom of the sleigh andsprawled there. It wasn't a case of urging them on, there was no holdingthem in till we reached the place. The devils took us there in threehours! Only the near one died of it."CHAPTER XVIIAnatole went out of the room and returned a few minutes later wearing afur coat girt with a silver belt, and a sable cap jauntily set on oneside and very becoming to his handsome face. Having looked in a mirror,and standing before Dolokhov in the same pose he had assumed before it,he lifted a glass of wine."Well, good-by, Theodore. Thank you for everything and farewell!" saidAnatole. "Well, comrades and friends..." he considered for a moment"...of my youth, farewell!" he said, turning to Makarin and the others.Though they were all going with him, Anatole evidently wished to makesomething touching and solemn out of this address to his comrades. Hespoke slowly in a loud voice and throwing out his chest slightly swayedone leg."All take glasses; you too, Balaga. Well, comrades and friends of myyouth, we've had our fling and lived and reveled. Eh? And now, whenshall we meet again? I am going abroad. We have had a good time--nowfarewell, lads! To our health! Hurrah!..." he cried, and emptying hisglass flung it on the floor."To your health!" said Balaga who also emptied his glass, and wiped hismouth with his handkerchief.Makarin embraced Anatole with tears in his eyes."Ah, Prince, how sorry I am to part from you!"Let's go. Let's go!" cried Anatole.Balaga was about to leave the room."No, stop!" said Anatole. "Shut the door; we have first to sit down.That's the way."They shut the door and all sat down."Now, quick march, lads!" said Anatole, rising.Joseph, his valet, handed him his sabretache and saber, and they allwent out into the vestibule."And where's the fur cloak?" asked Dolokhov. "Hey, Ignatka! Go toMatrena Matrevna and ask her for the sable cloak. I have heard whatelopements are like," continued Dolokhov with a wink. "Why, she'll rushout more dead than alive just in the things she is wearing; if you delayat all there'll be tears and 'Papa' and 'Mamma,' and she's frozen in aminute and must go back--but you wrap the fur cloak round her firstthing and carry her to the sleigh."The valet brought a woman's fox-lined cloak."Fool, I told you the sable one! Hey, Matrena, the sable!" he shouted sothat his voice rang far through the rooms.A handsome, slim, and pale-faced gypsy girl with glittering black eyesand curly blue-black hair, wearing a red shawl, ran out with a sablemantle on her arm."Here, I don't grudge it--take it!" she said, evidently afraid of hermaster and yet regretful of her cloak.Dolokhov, without answering, took the cloak, threw it over Matrena, andwrapped her up in it."That's the way," said Dolokhov, "and then so!" and he turned the collarup round her head, leaving only a little of the face uncovered. "Andthen so, do you see?" and he pushed Anatole's head forward to meet thegap left by the collar, through which Matrena's brilliant smile wasseen."Well, good-by, Matrena," said Anatole, kissing her. "Ah, my revels hereare over. Remember me to Steshka. There, good-by! Good-bye, Matrena,wish me luck!""Well, Prince, may God give you great luck!" said Matrena in her gypsyaccent.Two troykas were standing before the porch and two young drivers wereholding the horses. Balaga took his seat in the front one and holdinghis elbows high arranged the reins deliberately. Anatole and Dolokhovgot in with him. Makarin, Khvostikov, and a valet seated themselves inthe other sleigh."Well, are you ready?" asked Balaga."Go!" he cried, twisting the reins round his hands, and the troyka toredown the Nikitski Boulevard."Tproo! Get out of the way! Hi!... Tproo!..." The shouting of Balaga andof the sturdy young fellow seated on the box was all that could beheard. On the Arbat Square the troyka caught against a carriage;something cracked, shouts were heard, and the troyka flew along theArbat Street.After taking a turn along the Podnovinski Boulevard, Balaga began torein in, and turning back drew up at the crossing of the old KonyushenyStreet.The young fellow on the box jumped down to hold the horses and Anatoleand Dolokhov went along the pavement. When they reached the gateDolokhov whistled. The whistle was answered, and a maidservant ran out."Come into the courtyard or you'll be seen; she'll come out directly,"said she.Dolokhov stayed by the gate. Anatole followed the maid into thecourtyard, turned the corner, and ran up into the porch.He was met by Gabriel, Marya Dmitrievna's gigantic footman."Come to the mistress, please," said the footman in his deep bass,intercepting any retreat."To what Mistress? Who are you?" asked Anatole in a breathless whisper."Kindly step in, my orders are to bring you in.""Kuragin! Come back!" shouted Dolokhov. "Betrayed! Back!"Dolokhov, after Anatole entered, had remained at the wicket gate and wasstruggling with the yard porter who was trying to lock it. With a lastdesperate effort Dolokhov pushed the porter aside, and when Anatole ranback seized him by the arm, pulled him through the wicket, and ran backwith him to the troyka.CHAPTER XVIIIMarya Dmitrievna, having found Sonya weeping in the corridor, made herconfess everything, and intercepting the note to Natasha she read it andwent into Natasha's room with it in her hand."You shameless good-for-nothing!" said she. "I won't hear a word."Pushing back Natasha who looked at her with astonished but tearlesseyes, she locked her in; and having given orders to the yard porter toadmit the persons who would be coming that evening, but not to let themout again, and having told the footman to bring them up to her, sheseated herself in the drawing room to await the abductors.When Gabriel came to inform her that the men who had come had run awayagain, she rose frowning, and clasping her hands behind her pacedthrough the rooms a long time considering what she should do. Towardmidnight she went to Natasha's room fingering the key in her pocket.Sonya was sitting sobbing in the corridor. "Marya Dmitrievna, for God'ssake let me in to her!" she pleaded, but Marya Dmitrievna unlocked thedoor and went in without giving her an answer.... "Disgusting,abominable... In my house... horrid girl, hussy! I'm only sorry for herfather!" thought she, trying to restrain her wrath. "Hard as it may be,I'll tell them all to hold their tongues and will hide it from thecount." She entered the room with resolute steps. Natasha lying on thesofa, her head hidden in her hands, and she did not stir. She was injust the same position in which Marya Dmitrievna had left her."A nice girl! Very nice!" said Marya Dmitrievna. "Arranging meetingswith lovers in my house! It's no use pretending: you listen when I speakto you!" And Marya Dmitrievna touched her arm. "Listen when I speak!You've disgraced yourself like the lowest of hussies. I'd treat youdifferently, but I'm sorry for your father, so I will conceal it."Natasha did not change her position, but her whole body heaved withnoiseless, convulsive sobs which choked her. Marya Dmitrievna glancedround at Sonya and seated herself on the sofa beside Natasha."It's lucky for him that he escaped me; but I'll find him!" she said inher rough voice. "Do you hear what I am saying or not?" she added.She put her large hand under Natasha's face and turned it toward her.Both Marya Dmitrievna and Sonya were amazed when they saw how Natashalooked. Her eyes were dry and glistening, her lips compressed, hercheeks sunken."Let me be!... What is it to me?... I shall die!" she muttered,wrenching herself from Marya Dmitrievna's hands with a vicious effortand sinking down again into her former position."Natalie!" said Marya Dmitrievna. "I wish for your good. Lie still, staylike that then, I won't touch you. But listen. I won't tell you howguilty you are. You know that yourself. But when your father comes backtomorrow what am I to tell him? Eh?"Again Natasha's body shook with sobs."Suppose he finds out, and your brother, and your betrothed?""I have no betrothed: I have refused him!" cried Natasha."That's all the same," continued Marya Dmitrievna. "If they hear ofthis, will they let it pass? He, your father, I know him... if hechallenges him to a duel will that be all right? Eh?""Oh, let me be! Why have you interfered at all? Why? Why? Who asked youto?" shouted Natasha, raising herself on the sofa and lookingmalignantly at Marya Dmitrievna."But what did you want?" cried Marya Dmitrievna, growing angry again."Were you kept under lock and key? Who hindered his coming to the house?Why carry you off as if you were some gypsy singing girl?... Well, if hehad carried you off... do you think they wouldn't have found him? Yourfather, or brother, or your betrothed? And he's a scoundrel, a wretch--that's a fact!""He is better than any of you!" exclaimed Natasha getting up. "If youhadn't interfered... Oh, my God! What is it all? What is it? Sonya,why?... Go away!"And she burst into sobs with the despairing vehemence with which peoplebewail disasters they feel they have themselves occasioned. MaryaDmitrievna was to speak again but Natasha cried out:"Go away! Go away! You all hate and despise me!" and she threw herselfback on the sofa.Marya Dmitrievna went on admonishing her for some time, enjoining on herthat it must all be kept from her father and assuring her that nobodywould know anything about it if only Natasha herself would undertake toforget it all and not let anyone see that something had happened.Natasha did not reply, nor did she sob any longer, but she grew cold andhad a shivering fit. Marya Dmitrievna put a pillow under her head,covered her with two quilts, and herself brought her some lime-flowerwater, but Natasha did not respond to her."Well, let her sleep," said Marya Dmitrievna as she went out of the roomsupposing Natasha to be asleep.But Natasha was not asleep; with pale face and fixed wide-open eyes shelooked straight before her. All that night she did not sleep or weep anddid not speak to Sonya who got up and went to her several times.Next day Count Rostov returned from his estate near Moscow in time forlunch as he had promised. He was in very good spirits; the affair withthe purchaser was going on satisfactorily, and there was nothing to keephim any longer in Moscow, away from the countess whom he missed. MaryaDmitrievna met him and told him that Natasha had been very unwell theday before and that they had sent for the doctor, but that she wasbetter now. Natasha had not left her room that morning. With compressedand parched lips and dry fixed eyes, she sat at the window, uneasilywatching the people who drove past and hurriedly glancing round atanyone who entered the room. She was evidently expecting news of him andthat he would come or would write to her.When the count came to see her she turned anxiously round at the soundof a man's footstep, and then her face resumed its cold and malevolentexpression. She did not even get up to greet him. "What is the matterwith you, my angel? Are you ill?" asked the count.After a moment's silence Natasha answered: "Yes, ill."In reply to the count's anxious inquiries as to why she was so dejectedand whether anything had happened to her betrothed, she assured him thatnothing had happened and asked him not to worry. Marya Dmitrievnaconfirmed Natasha's assurances that nothing had happened. From thepretense of illness, from his daughter's distress, and by theembarrassed faces of Sonya and Marya Dmitrievna, the count saw clearlythat something had gone wrong during his absence, but it was so terriblefor him to think that anything disgraceful had happened to his beloveddaughter, and he so prized his own cheerful tranquillity, that heavoided inquiries and tried to assure himself that nothing particularlyhad happened; and he was only dissatisfied that her indispositiondelayed their return to the country.CHAPTER XIXFrom the day his wife arrived in Moscow Pierre had been intending to goaway somewhere, so as not to be near her. Soon after the Rostovs came toMoscow the effect Natasha had on him made him hasten to carry out hisintention. He went to Tver to see Joseph Alexeevich's widow, who hadlong since promised to hand over to him some papers of her deceasedhusband's.When he returned to Moscow Pierre was handed a letter from MaryaDmitrievna asking him to come and see her on a matter of greatimportance relating to Andrew Bolkonski and his betrothed. Pierre hadbeen avoiding Natasha because it seemed to him that his feeling for herwas stronger than a married man's should be for his friend's fiancee.Yet some fate constantly threw them together."What can have happened? And what can they want with me?" thought he ashe dressed to go to Marya Dmitrievna's. "If only Prince Andrew wouldhurry up and come and marry her!" thought he on his way to the house.On the Tverskoy Boulevard a familiar voice called to him."Pierre! Been back long?" someone shouted. Pierre raised his head. In asleigh drawn by two gray trotting-horses that were bespattering thedashboard with snow, Anatole and his constant companion Makarin dashedpast. Anatole was sitting upright in the classic pose of militarydandies, the lower part of his face hidden by his beaver collar and hishead slightly bent. His face was fresh and rosy, his white-plumed hat,tilted to one side, disclosed his curled and pomaded hair besprinkledwith powdery snow."Yes, indeed, that's a true sage," thought Pierre. "He sees nothingbeyond the pleasure of the moment, nothing troubles him and so he isalways cheerful, satisfied, and serene. What wouldn't I give to be likehim!" he thought enviously.In Marya Dmitrievna's anteroom the footman who helped him off with hisfur coat said that the mistress asked him to come to her bedroom.When he opened the ballroom door Pierre saw Natasha sitting at thewindow, with a thin, pale, and spiteful face. She glanced round at him,frowned, and left the room with an expression of cold dignity."What has happened?" asked Pierre, entering Marya Dmitrievna's room."Fine doings!" answered Dmitrievna. "For fifty-eight years have I livedin this world and never known anything so disgraceful!"And having put him on his honor not to repeat anything she told him,Marya Dmitrievna informed him that Natasha had refused Prince Andrewwithout her parents' knowledge and that the cause of this was AnatoleKuragin into whose society Pierre's wife had thrown her and with whomNatasha had tried to elope during her father's absence, in order to bemarried secretly.Pierre raised his shoulders and listened open-mouthed to what was toldhim, scarcely able to believe his own ears. That Prince Andrew's deeplyloved affianced wife--the same Natasha Rostova who used to be socharming--should give up Bolkonski for that fool Anatole who was alreadysecretly married (as Pierre knew), and should be so in love with him asto agree to run away with him, was something Pierre could not conceiveand could not imagine.He could not reconcile the charming impression he had of Natasha, whomhe had known from a child, with this new conception of her baseness,folly, and cruelty. He thought of his wife. "They are all alike!" hesaid to himself, reflecting that he was not the only man unfortunateenough to be tied to a bad woman. But still he pitied Prince Andrew tothe point of tears and sympathized with his wounded pride, and the morehe pitied his friend the more did he think with contempt and even withdisgust of that Natasha who had just passed him in the ballroom withsuch a look of cold dignity. He did not know that Natasha's soul wasoverflowing with despair, shame, and humiliation, and that it was nother fault that her face happened to assume an expression of calm dignityand severity."But how get married?" said Pierre, in answer to Marya Dmitrievna. "Hecould not marry--he is married!""Things get worse from hour to hour!" ejaculated Marya Dmitrievna. "Anice youth! What a scoundrel! And she's expecting him--expecting himsince yesterday. She must be told! Then at least she won't go onexpecting him."After hearing the details of Anatole's marriage from Pierre, and givingvent to her anger against Anatole in words of abuse, Marya Dmitrievnatold Pierre why she had sent for him. She was afraid that the count orBolkonski, who might arrive at any moment, if they knew of this affair(which she hoped to hide from them) might challenge Anatole to a duel,and she therefore asked Pierre to tell his brother-in-law in her name toleave Moscow and not dare to let her set eyes on him again. Pierre--onlynow realizing the danger to the old count, Nicholas, and Prince Andrew--promised to do as she wished. Having briefly and exactly explained herwishes to him, she let him go to the drawing room."Mind, the count knows nothing. Behave as if you know nothing either,"she said. "And I will go and tell her it is no use expecting him! Andstay to dinner if you care to!" she called after Pierre.Pierre met the old count, who seemed nervous and upset. That morningNatasha had told him that she had rejected Bolkonski."Troubles, troubles, my dear fellow!" he said to Pierre. "What troublesone has with these girls without their mother! I do so regret havingcome here.... I will be frank with you. Have you heard she has brokenoff her engagement without consulting anybody? It's true this engagementnever was much to my liking. Of course he is an excellent man, butstill, with his father's disapproval they wouldn't have been happy, andNatasha won't lack suitors. Still, it has been going on so long, and totake such a step without father's or mother's consent! And now she'sill, and God knows what! It's hard, Count, hard to manage daughters intheir mother's absence...."Pierre saw that the count was much upset and tried to change thesubject, but the count returned to his troubles.Sonya entered the room with an agitated face."Natasha is not quite well; she's in her room and would like to see you.Marya Dmitrievna is with her and she too asks you to come.""Yes, you are a great friend of Bolkonski's, no doubt she wants to sendhim a message," said the count. "Oh dear! Oh dear! How happy it allwas!"And clutching the spare gray locks on his temples the count left theroom.When Marya Dmitrievna told Natasha that Anatole was married, Natasha didnot wish to believe it and insisted on having it confirmed by Pierrehimself. Sonya told Pierre this as she led him along the corridor toNatasha's room.Natasha, pale and stern, was sitting beside Marya Dmitrievna, and hereyes, glittering feverishly, met Pierre with a questioning look themoment he entered. She did not smile or nod, but only gazed fixedly athim, and her look asked only one thing: was he a friend, or like theothers an enemy in regard to Anatole? As for Pierre, he evidently didnot exist for her."He knows all about it," said Marya Dmitrievna pointing to Pierre andaddressing Natasha. "Let him tell you whether I have told the truth."Natasha looked from one to the other as a hunted and wounded animallooks at the approaching dogs and sportsmen."Natalya Ilynichna," Pierre began, dropping his eyes with a feeling ofpity for her and loathing for the thing he had to do, "whether it istrue or not should make no difference to you, because...""Then it is not true that he's married!""Yes, it is true.""Has he been married long?" she asked. "On your honor?..."Pierre gave his word of honor."Is he still here?" she asked, quickly."Yes, I have just seen him."She was evidently unable to speak and made a sign with her hands thatthey should leave her alone.CHAPTER XXPierre did not stay for dinner, but left the room and went away at once.He drove through the town seeking Anatole Kuragin, at the thought ofwhom now the blood rushed to his heart and he felt a difficulty inbreathing. He was not at the ice hills, nor at the gypsies', nor atKomoneno's. Pierre drove to the club. In the club all was going on asusual. The members who were assembling for dinner were sitting about ingroups; they greeted Pierre and spoke of the town news. The footmanhaving greeted him, knowing his habits and his acquaintances, told himthere was a place left for him in the small dining room and that PrinceMichael Zakharych was in the library, but Paul Timofeevich had not yetarrived. One of Pierre's acquaintances, while they were talking aboutthe weather, asked if he had heard of Kuragin's abduction of Rostovawhich was talked of in the town, and was it true? Pierre laughed andsaid it was nonsense for he had just come from the Rostovs'. He askedeveryone about Anatole. One man told him he had not come yet, andanother that he was coming to dinner. Pierre felt it strange to see thiscalm, indifferent crowd of people unaware of what was going on in hissoul. He paced through the ballroom, waited till everyone had come, andas Anatole had not turned up did not stay for dinner but drove home.Anatole, for whom Pierre was looking, dined that day with Dolokhov,consulting him as to how to remedy this unfortunate affair. It seemed tohim essential to see Natasha. In the evening he drove to his sister's todiscuss with her how to arrange a meeting. When Pierre returned homeafter vainly hunting all over Moscow, his valet informed him that PrinceAnatole was with the countess. The countess' drawing room was full ofguests.Pierre without greeting his wife whom he had not seen since his return--at that moment she was more repulsive to him than ever--entered thedrawing room and seeing Anatole went up to him."Ah, Pierre," said the countess going up to her husband. "You don't knowwhat a plight our Anatole..."She stopped, seeing in the forward thrust of her husband's head, in hisglowing eyes and his resolute gait, the terrible indications of thatrage and strength which she knew and had herself experienced after hisduel with Dolokhov."Where you are, there is vice and evil!" said Pierre to his wife."Anatole, come with me! I must speak to you," he added in French.Anatole glanced round at his sister and rose submissively, ready tofollow Pierre. Pierre, taking him by the arm, pulled him toward himselfand was leading him from the room."If you allow yourself in my drawing room..." whispered Helene, butPierre did not reply and went out of the room.Anatole followed him with his usual jaunty step but his face betrayedanxiety.Having entered his study Pierre closed the door and addressed Anatolewithout looking at him."You promised Countess Rostova to marry her and were about to elope withher, is that so?""Mon cher," answered Anatole (their whole conversation was in French),"I don't consider myself bound to answer questions put to me in thattone."Pierre's face, already pale, became distorted by fury. He seized Anatoleby the collar of his uniform with his big hand and shook him from sideto side till Anatole's face showed a sufficient degree of terror."When I tell you that I must talk to you!..." repeated Pierre."Come now, this is stupid. What?" said Anatole, fingering a button ofhis collar that had been wrenched loose with a bit of the cloth."You're a scoundrel and a blackguard, and I don't know what deprives mefrom the pleasure of smashing your head with this!" said Pierre,expressing himself so artificially because he was talking French.He took a heavy paperweight and lifted it threateningly, but at once putit back in its place."Did you promise to marry her?""I... I didn't think of it. I never promised, because..."Pierre interrupted him."Have you any letters of hers? Any letters?" he said, moving towardAnatole.Anatole glanced at him and immediately thrust his hand into his pocketand drew out his pocketbook.Pierre took the letter Anatole handed him and, pushing aside a tablethat stood in his way, threw himself on the sofa."I shan't be violent, don't be afraid!" said Pierre in answer to afrightened gesture of Anatole's. "First, the letters," said he, as ifrepeating a lesson to himself. "Secondly," he continued after a shortpause, again rising and again pacing the room, "tomorrow you must getout of Moscow.""But how can I?...""Thirdly," Pierre continued without listening to him, "you must neverbreathe a word of what has passed between you and Countess Rostova. Iknow I can't prevent your doing so, but if you have a spark ofconscience..." Pierre paced the room several times in silence.Anatole sat at a table frowning and biting his lips."After all, you must understand that besides your pleasure there is sucha thing as other people's happiness and peace, and that you are ruininga whole life for the sake of amusing yourself! Amuse yourself with womenlike my wife--with them you are within your rights, for they know whatyou want of them. They are armed against you by the same experience ofdebauchery; but to promise a maid to marry her... to deceive, tokidnap.... Don't you understand that it is as mean as beating an old manor a child?..."Pierre paused and looked at Anatole no longer with an angry but with aquestioning look."I don't know about that, eh?" said Anatole, growing more confident asPierre mastered his wrath. "I don't know that and don't want to," hesaid, not looking at Pierre and with a slight tremor of his lower jaw,"but you have used such words to me--'mean' and so on--which as a man ofhonor I can't allow anyone to use."Pierre glanced at him with amazement, unable to understand what hewanted."Though it was tte--tte," Anatole continued, "still I can't...""Is it satisfaction you want?" said Pierre ironically."You could at least take back your words. What? If you want me to do asyou wish, eh?""I take them back, I take them back!" said Pierre, "and I ask you toforgive me." Pierre involuntarily glanced at the loose button. "And ifyou require money for your journey..."Anatole smiled. The expression of that base and cringing smile, whichPierre knew so well in his wife, revolted him."Oh, vile and heartless brood!" he exclaimed, and left the room.Next day Anatole left for Petersburg.CHAPTER XXIPierre drove to Marya Dmitrievna's to tell her of the fulfillment of herwish that Kuragin should be banished from Moscow. The whole house was ina state of alarm and commotion. Natasha was very ill, having, as MaryaDmitrievna told him in secret, poisoned herself the night after she hadbeen told that Anatole was married, with some arsenic she had stealthilyprocured. After swallowing a little she had been so frightened that shewoke Sonya and told her what she had done. The necessary antidotes hadbeen administered in time and she was now out of danger, though still soweak that it was out of the question to move her to the country, and sothe countess had been sent for. Pierre saw the distracted count, andSonya, who had a tear-stained face, but he could not see Natasha.Pierre dined at the club that day and heard on all sides gossip aboutthe attempted abduction of Rostova. He resolutely denied these rumors,assuring everyone that nothing had happened except that his brother-in-law had proposed to her and been refused. It seemed to Pierre that itwas his duty to conceal the whole affair and re-establish Natasha'sreputation.He was awaiting Prince Andrew's return with dread and went every day tothe old prince's for news of him.Old Prince Bolkonski heard all the rumors current in the town fromMademoiselle Bourienne and had read the note to Princess Mary in whichNatasha had broken off her engagement. He seemed in better spirits thanusual and awaited his son with great impatience.Some days after Anatole's departure Pierre received a note from PrinceAndrew, informing him of his arrival and asking him to come to see him.As soon as he reached Moscow, Prince Andrew had received from his fatherNatasha's note to Princess Mary breaking off her engagement(Mademoiselle Bourienne had purloined it from Princess Mary and given itto the old prince), and he heard from him the story of Natasha'selopement, with additions.Prince Andrew had arrived in the evening and Pierre came to see him nextmorning. Pierre expected to find Prince Andrew in almost the same stateas Natasha and was therefore surprised on entering the drawing room tohear him in the study talking in a loud animated voice about someintrigue going on in Petersburg. The old prince's voice and another nowand then interrupted him. Princess Mary came out to meet Pierre. Shesighed, looking toward the door of the room where Prince Andrew was,evidently intending to express her sympathy with his sorrow, but Pierresaw by her face that she was glad both at what had happened and at theway her brother had taken the news of Natasha's faithlessness."He says he expected it," she remarked. "I know his pride will not lethim express his feelings, but still he has taken it better, far better,than I expected. Evidently it had to be....""But is it possible that all is really ended?" asked Pierre.Princess Mary looked at him with astonishment. She did not understandhow he could ask such a question. Pierre went into the study. PrinceAndrew, greatly changed and plainly in better health, but with a freshhorizontal wrinkle between his brows, stood in civilian dress facing hisfather and Prince Meshcherski, warmly disputing and vigorouslygesticulating. The conversation was about Speranski--the news of whosesudden exile and alleged treachery had just reached Moscow."Now he is censured and accused by all who were enthusiastic about him amonth ago," Prince Andrew was saying, "and by those who were unable tounderstand his aims. To judge a man who is in disfavor and to throw onhim all the blame of other men's mistakes is very easy, but I maintainthat if anything good has been accomplished in this reign it was done byhim, by him alone."He paused at the sight of Pierre. His face quivered and immediatelyassumed a vindictive expression."Posterity will do him justice," he concluded, and at once turned toPierre."Well, how are you? Still getting stouter?" he said with animation, butthe new wrinkle on his forehead deepened. "Yes, I am well," he said inanswer to Pierre's question, and smiled.To Pierre that smile said plainly: "I am well, but my health is now ofno use to anyone."After a few words to Pierre about the awful roads from the Polishfrontier, about people he had met in Switzerland who knew Pierre, andabout M. Dessalles, whom he had brought from abroad to be his son'stutor, Prince Andrew again joined warmly in the conversation aboutSperanski which was still going on between the two old men."If there were treason, or proofs of secret relations with Napoleon,they would have been made public," he said with warmth and haste. "I donot, and never did, like Speranski personally, but I like justice!"Pierre now recognized in his friend a need with which he was only toofamiliar, to get excited and to have arguments about extraneous mattersin order to stifle thoughts that were too oppressive and too intimate.When Prince Meshcherski had left, Prince Andrew took Pierre's arm andasked him into the room that had been assigned him. A bed had been madeup there, and some open portmanteaus and trunks stood about. PrinceAndrew went to one and took out a small casket, from which he drew apacket wrapped in paper. He did it all silently and very quickly. Hestood up and coughed. His face was gloomy and his lips compressed."Forgive me for troubling you..."Pierre saw that Prince Andrew was going to speak of Natasha, and hisbroad face expressed pity and sympathy. This expression irritated PrinceAndrew, and in a determined, ringing, and unpleasant tone he continued:"I have received a refusal from Countess Rostova and have heard reportsof your brother-in-law having sought her hand, or something of thatkind. Is that true?""Both true and untrue," Pierre began; but Prince Andrew interrupted him."Here are her letters and her portrait," said he.He took the packet from the table and handed it to Pierre."Give this to the countess... if you see her.""She is very ill," said Pierre."Then she is here still?" said Prince Andrew. "And Prince Kuragin?" headded quickly."He left long ago. She has been at death's door.""I much regret her illness," said Prince Andrew; and he smiled like hisfather, coldly, maliciously, and unpleasantly."So Monsieur Kuragin has not honored Countess Rostova with his hand?"said Prince Andrew, and he snorted several times."He could not marry, for he was married already," said Pierre.Prince Andrew laughed disagreeably, again reminding one of his father."And where is your brother-in-law now, if I may ask?" he said."He has gone to Peters... But I don't know," said Pierre."Well, it doesn't matter," said Prince Andrew. "Tell Countess Rostovathat she was and is perfectly free and that I wish her all that isgood."Pierre took the packet. Prince Andrew, as if trying to remember whetherhe had something more to say, or waiting to see if Pierre would sayanything, looked fixedly at him."I say, do you remember our discussion in Petersburg?" asked Pierre,"about...""Yes," returned Prince Andrew hastily. "I said that a fallen womanshould be forgiven, but I didn't say I could forgive her. I can't.""But can this be compared...?" said Pierre.Prince Andrew interrupted him and cried sharply: "Yes, ask her handagain, be magnanimous, and so on?... Yes, that would be very noble, butI am unable to follow in that gentleman's footsteps. If you wish to bemy friend never speak to me of that... of all that! Well, good-by. Soyou'll give her the packet?"Pierre left the room and went to the old prince and Princess Mary.The old man seemed livelier than usual. Princess Mary was the same asalways, but beneath her sympathy for her brother, Pierre noticed hersatisfaction that the engagement had been broken off. Looking at themPierre realized what contempt and animosity they all felt for theRostovs, and that it was impossible in their presence even to mentionthe name of her who could give up Prince Andrew for anyone else.At dinner the talk turned on the war, the approach of which was becomingevident. Prince Andrew talked incessantly, arguing now with his father,now with the Swiss tutor Dessalles, and showing an unnatural animation,the cause of which Pierre so well understood.CHAPTER XXIIThat same evening Pierre went to the Rostovs' to fulfill the commissionentrusted to him. Natasha was in bed, the count at the club, and Pierre,after giving the letters to Sonya, went to Marya Dmitrievna who wasinterested to know how Prince Andrew had taken the news. Ten minuteslater Sonya came to Marya Dmitrievna."Natasha insists on seeing Count Peter Kirilovich," said she."But how? Are we to take him up to her? The room there has not beentidied up.""No, she has dressed and gone into the drawing room," said Sonya.Marya Dmitrievna only shrugged her shoulders."When will her mother come? She has worried me to death! Now mind, don'ttell her everything!" said she to Pierre. "One hasn't the heart to scoldher, she is so much to be pitied, so much to be pitied."Natasha was standing in the middle of the drawing room, emaciated, witha pale set face, but not at all shamefaced as Pierre expected to findher. When he appeared at the door she grew flurried, evidently undecidedwhether to go to meet him or to wait till he came up.Pierre hastened to her. He thought she would give him her hand as usual;but she, stepping up to him, stopped, breathing heavily, her armshanging lifelessly just in the pose she used to stand in when she wentto the middle of the ballroom to sing, but with quite a differentexpression of face."Peter Kirilovich," she began rapidly, "Prince Bolkonski was yourfriend--is your friend," she corrected herself. (It seemed to her thateverything that had once been must now be different.) "He told me onceto apply to you..."Pierre sniffed as he looked at her, but did not speak. Till then he hadreproached her in his heart and tried to despise her, but he now felt sosorry for her that there was no room in his soul for reproach."He is here now: tell him... to for... forgive me!" She stopped andbreathed still more quickly, but did not shed tears."Yes... I will tell him," answered Pierre; "but..."He did not know what to say.Natasha was evidently dismayed at the thought of what he might think shehad meant."No, I know all is over," she said hurriedly. "No, that can never be.I'm only tormented by the wrong I have done him. Tell him only that Ibeg him to forgive, forgive, forgive me for everything...."She trembled all over and sat down on a chair.A sense of pity he had never before known overflowed Pierre's heart."I will tell him, I will tell him everything once more," said Pierre."But... I should like to know one thing....""Know what?" Natasha's eyes asked."I should like to know, did you love..." Pierre did not know how torefer to Anatole and flushed at the thought of him--"did you love thatbad man?""Don't call him bad!" said Natasha. "But I don't know, don't know atall...."She began to cry and a still greater sense of pity, tenderness, and lovewelled up in Pierre. He felt the tears trickle under his spectacles andhoped they would not be noticed."We won't speak of it any more, my dear," said Pierre, and his gentle,cordial tone suddenly seemed very strange to Natasha."We won't speak of it, my dear--I'll tell him everything; but one thingI beg of you, consider me your friend and if you want help, advice, orsimply to open your heart to someone--not now, but when your mind isclearer think of me!" He took her hand and kissed it. "I shall be happyif it's in my power..."Pierre grew confused."Don't speak to me like that. I am not worth it!" exclaimed Natasha andturned to leave the room, but Pierre held her hand.He knew he had something more to say to her. But when he said it he wasamazed at his own words."Stop, stop! You have your whole life before you," said he to her."Before me? No! All is over for me," she replied with shame and self-abasement."All over?" he repeated. "If I were not myself, but the handsomest,cleverest, and best man in the world, and were free, I would this momentask on my knees for your hand and your love!"For the first time for many days Natasha wept tears of gratitude andtenderness, and glancing at Pierre she went out of the room.Pierre too when she had gone almost ran into the anteroom, restrainingtears of tenderness and joy that choked him, and without finding thesleeves of his fur cloak threw it on and got into his sleigh."Where to now, your excellency?" asked the coachman."Where to?" Pierre asked himself. "Where can I go now? Surely not to theclub or to pay calls?" All men seemed so pitiful, so poor, in comparisonwith this feeling of tenderness and love he experienced: in comparisonwith that softened, grateful, last look she had given him through hertears."Home!" said Pierre, and despite twenty-two degrees of frost Fahrenheithe threw open the bearskin cloak from his broad chest and inhaled theair with joy.It was clear and frosty. Above the dirty, ill-lit streets, above theblack roofs, stretched the dark starry sky. Only looking up at the skydid Pierre cease to feel how sordid and humiliating were all mundanethings compared with the heights to which his soul had just been raised.At the entrance to the Arbat Square an immense expanse of dark starrysky presented itself to his eyes. Almost in the center of it, above thePrechistenka Boulevard, surrounded and sprinkled on all sides by starsbut distinguished from them all by its nearness to the earth, its whitelight, and its long uplifted tail, shone the enormous and brilliantcomet of 1812--the comet which was said to portend all kinds of woes andthe end of the world. In Pierre, however, that comet with its longluminous tail aroused no feeling of fear. On the contrary he gazedjoyfully, his eyes moist with tears, at this bright comet which, havingtraveled in its orbit with inconceivable velocity through immeasurablespace, seemed suddenly--like an arrow piercing the earth--to remainfixed in a chosen spot, vigorously holding its tail erect, shining anddisplaying its white light amid countless other scintillating stars. Itseemed to Pierre that this comet fully responded to what was passing inhis own softened and uplifted soul, now blossoming into a new life.BOOK NINE: 1812CHAPTER IFrom the close of the year 1811 intensified arming and concentrating ofthe forces of Western Europe began, and in 1812 these forces--millionsof men, reckoning those transporting and feeding the army--moved fromthe west eastwards to the Russian frontier, toward which since 1811Russian forces had been similarly drawn. On the twelfth of June, 1812,the forces of Western Europe crossed the Russian frontier and war began,that is, an event took place opposed to human reason and to humannature. Millions of men perpetrated against one another such innumerablecrimes, frauds, treacheries, thefts, forgeries, issues of false money,burglaries, incendiarisms, and murders as in whole centuries are notrecorded in the annals of all the law courts of the world, but whichthose who committed them did not at the time regard as being crimes.What produced this extraordinary occurrence? What were its causes? Thehistorians tell us with naive assurance that its causes were the wrongsinflicted on the Duke of Oldenburg, the nonobservance of the ContinentalSystem, the ambition of Napoleon, the firmness of Alexander, themistakes of the diplomatists, and so on.Consequently, it would only have been necessary for Metternich,Rumyantsev, or Talleyrand, between a levee and an evening party, to havetaken proper pains and written a more adroit note, or for Napoleon tohave written to Alexander: "My respected Brother, I consent to restorethe duchy to the Duke of Oldenburg"--and there would have been no war.We can understand that the matter seemed like that to contemporaries. Itnaturally seemed to Napoleon that the war was caused by England'sintrigues (as in fact he said on the island of St. Helena). It naturallyseemed to members of the English Parliament that the cause of the warwas Napoleon's ambition; to the Duke of Oldenburg, that the cause of thewar was the violence done to him; to businessmen that the cause of thewar was the Continental System which was ruining Europe; to the generalsand old soldiers that the chief reason for the war was the necessity ofgiving them employment; to the legitimists of that day that it was theneed of re-establishing les bons principes, and to the diplomatists ofthat time that it all resulted from the fact that the alliance betweenRussia and Austria in 1809 had not been sufficiently well concealed fromNapoleon, and from the awkward wording of Memorandum No. 178. It isnatural that these and a countless and infinite quantity of otherreasons, the number depending on the endless diversity of points ofview, presented themselves to the men of that day; but to us, toposterity who view the thing that happened in all its magnitude andperceive its plain and terrible meaning, these causes seem insufficient.To us it is incomprehensible that millions of Christian men killed andtortured each other either because Napoleon was ambitious or Alexanderwas firm, or because England's policy was astute or the Duke ofOldenburg wronged. We cannot grasp what connection such circumstanceshave with the actual fact of slaughter and violence: why because theDuke was wronged, thousands of men from the other side of Europe killedand ruined the people of Smolensk and Moscow and were killed by them.To us, their descendants, who are not historians and are not carriedaway by the process of research and can therefore regard the event withunclouded common sense, an incalculable number of causes presentthemselves. The deeper we delve in search of these causes the more ofthem we find; and each separate cause or whole series of causes appearsto us equally valid in itself and equally false by its insignificancecompared to the magnitude of the events, and by its impotence--apartfrom the cooperation of all the other coincident causes--to occasion theevent. To us, the wish or objection of this or that French corporal toserve a second term appears as much a cause as Napoleon's refusal towithdraw his troops beyond the Vistula and to restore the duchy ofOldenburg; for had he not wished to serve, and had a second, a third,and a thousandth corporal and private also refused, there would havebeen so many less men in Napoleon's army and the war could not haveoccurred.Had Napoleon not taken offense at the demand that he should withdrawbeyond the Vistula, and not ordered his troops to advance, there wouldhave been no war; but had all his sergeants objected to serving a secondterm then also there could have been no war. Nor could there have been awar had there been no English intrigues and no Duke of Oldenburg, andhad Alexander not felt insulted, and had there not been an autocraticgovernment in Russia, or a Revolution in France and a subsequentdictatorship and Empire, or all the things that produced the FrenchRevolution, and so on. Without each of these causes nothing could havehappened. So all these causes--myriads of causes--coincided to bring itabout. And so there was no one cause for that occurrence, but it had tooccur because it had to. Millions of men, renouncing their humanfeelings and reason, had to go from west to east to slay their fellows,just as some centuries previously hordes of men had come from the eastto the west, slaying their fellows.The actions of Napoleon and Alexander, on whose words the event seemedto hang, were as little voluntary as the actions of any soldier who wasdrawn into the campaign by lot or by conscription. This could not beotherwise, for in order that the will of Napoleon and Alexander (on whomthe event seemed to depend) should be carried out, the concurrence ofinnumerable circumstances was needed without any one of which the eventcould not have taken place. It was necessary that millions of men inwhose hands lay the real power--the soldiers who fired, or transportedprovisions and guns--should consent to carry out the will of these weakindividuals, and should have been induced to do so by an infinite numberof diverse and complex causes.We are forced to fall back on fatalism as an explanation of irrationalevents (that is to say, events the reasonableness of which we do notunderstand). The more we try to explain such events in historyreasonably, the more unreasonable and incomprehensible do they become tous.Each man lives for himself, using his freedom to attain his personalaims, and feels with his whole being that he can now do or abstain fromdoing this or that action; but as soon as he has done it, that actionperformed at a certain moment in time becomes irrevocable and belongs tohistory, in which it has not a free but a predestined significance.There are two sides to the life of every man, his individual life, whichis the more free the more abstract its interests, and his elemental hivelife in which he inevitably obeys laws laid down for him.Man lives consciously for himself, but is an unconscious instrument inthe attainment of the historic, universal, aims of humanity. A deed doneis irrevocable, and its result coinciding in time with the actions ofmillions of other men assumes an historic significance. The higher a manstands on the social ladder, the more people he is connected with andthe more power he has over others, the more evident is thepredestination and inevitability of his every action."The king's heart is in the hands of the Lord."A king is history's slave.History, that is, the unconscious, general, hive life of mankind, usesevery moment of the life of kings as a tool for its own purposes.Though Napoleon at that time, in 1812, was more convinced than ever thatit depended on him, verser (ou ne pas verser) le sang de ses peuples *--as Alexander expressed it in the last letter he wrote him--he had neverbeen so much in the grip of inevitable laws, which compelled him, whilethinking that he was acting on his own volition, to perform for the hivelife--that is to say, for history--whatever had to be performed.* "To shed (or not to shed) the blood of his peoples."The people of the west moved eastwards to slay their fellow men, and bythe law of coincidence thousands of minute causes fitted in and co-ordinated to produce that movement and war: reproaches for thenonobservance of the Continental System, the Duke of Oldenburg's wrongs,the movement of troops into Prussia--undertaken (as it seemed toNapoleon) only for the purpose of securing an armed peace, the FrenchEmperor's love and habit of war coinciding with his people'sinclinations, allurement by the grandeur of the preparations, and theexpenditure on those preparations and the need of obtaining advantagesto compensate for that expenditure, the intoxicating honors he receivedin Dresden, the diplomatic negotiations which, in the opinion ofcontemporaries, were carried on with a sincere desire to attain peace,but which only wounded the self-love of both sides, and millions ofother causes that adapted themselves to the event that was happening orcoincided with it.When an apple has ripened and falls, why does it fall? Because of itsattraction to the earth, because its stalk withers, because it is driedby the sun, because it grows heavier, because the wind shakes it, orbecause the boy standing below wants to eat it?Nothing is the cause. All this is only the coincidence of conditions inwhich all vital organic and elemental events occur. And the botanist whofinds that the apple falls because the cellular tissue decays and soforth is equally right with the child who stands under the tree and saysthe apple fell because he wanted to eat it and prayed for it. Equallyright or wrong is he who says that Napoleon went to Moscow because hewanted to, and perished because Alexander desired his destruction, andhe who says that an undermined hill weighing a million tons fell becausethe last navvy struck it for the last time with his mattock. In historicevents the so-called great men are labels giving names to events, andlike labels they have but the smallest connection with the event itself.Every act of theirs, which appears to them an act of their own will, isin an historical sense involuntary and is related to the whole course ofhistory and predestined from eternity.CHAPTER IIOn the twenty-ninth of May Napoleon left Dresden, where he had spentthree weeks surrounded by a court that included princes, dukes, kings,and even an emperor. Before leaving, Napoleon showed favor to theemperor, kings, and princes who had deserved it, reprimanded the kingsand princes with whom he was dissatisfied, presented pearls and diamondsof his own--that is, which he had taken from other kings--to the Empressof Austria, and having, as his historian tells us, tenderly embraced theEmpress Marie Louise--who regarded him as her husband, though he hadleft another wife in Paris--left her grieved by the parting which sheseemed hardly able to bear. Though the diplomatists still firmlybelieved in the possibility of peace and worked zealously to that end,and though the Emperor Napoleon himself wrote a letter to Alexander,calling him Monsieur mon frere, and sincerely assured him that he didnot want war and would always love and honor him--yet he set off to joinhis army, and at every station gave fresh orders to accelerate themovement of his troops from west to east. He went in a traveling coachwith six horses, surrounded by pages, aides-de-camp, and an escort,along the road to Posen, Thorn, Danzig, and Konigsberg. At each of thesetowns thousands of people met him with excitement and enthusiasm.The army was moving from west to east, and relays of six horses carriedhim in the same direction. On the tenth of June, * coming up with thearmy, he spent the night in apartments prepared for him on the estate ofa Polish count in the Vilkavisski forest.* Old style.Next day, overtaking the army, he went in a carriage to the Niemen, and,changing into a Polish uniform, he drove to the riverbank in order toselect a place for the crossing.Seeing, on the other side, some Cossacks (les Cosaques) and the wide-spreading steppes in the midst of which lay the holy city of Moscow(Moscou, la ville sainte), the capital of a realm such as the Scythiainto which Alexander the Great had marched--Napoleon unexpectedly, andcontrary alike to strategic and diplomatic considerations, ordered anadvance, and the next day his army began to cross the Niemen.Early in the morning of the twelfth of June he came out of his tent,which was pitched that day on the steep left bank of the Niemen, andlooked through a spyglass at the streams of his troops pouring out ofthe Vilkavisski forest and flowing over the three bridges thrown acrossthe river. The troops, knowing of the Emperor's presence, were on thelookout for him, and when they caught sight of a figure in an overcoatand a cocked hat standing apart from his suite in front of his tent onthe hill, they threw up their caps and shouted: "Vive l'Empereur!" andone after another poured in a ceaseless stream out of the vast forestthat had concealed them and, separating, flowed on and on by the threebridges to the other side."Now we'll go into action. Oh, when he takes it in hand himself, thingsget hot... by heaven!... There he is!... Vive l'Empereur! So these arethe steppes of Asia! It's a nasty country all the same. Au revoir,Beauche; I'll keep the best palace in Moscow for you! Au revoir. Goodluck!... Did you see the Emperor? Vive l'Empereur!... preur!--If theymake me Governor of India, Gerard, I'll make you Minister of Kashmir--that's settled. Vive l'Empereur! Hurrah! hurrah! hurrah! The Cossacks--those rascals--see how they run! Vive l'Empereur! There he is, do yousee him? I've seen him twice, as I see you now. The little corporal... Isaw him give the cross to one of the veterans.... Vive l'Empereur!" camethe voices of men, old and young, of most diverse characters and socialpositions. On the faces of all was one common expression of joy at thecommencement of the long-expected campaign and of rapture and devotionto the man in the gray coat who was standing on the hill.On the thirteenth of June a rather small, thoroughbred Arab horse wasbrought to Napoleon. He mounted it and rode at a gallop to one of thebridges over the Niemen, deafened continually by incessant and rapturousacclamations which he evidently endured only because it was impossibleto forbid the soldiers to express their love of him by such shouting,but the shouting which accompanied him everywhere disturbed him anddistracted him from the military cares that had occupied him from thetime he joined the army. He rode across one of the swaying pontoonbridges to the farther side, turned sharply to the left, and galloped inthe direction of Kovno, preceded by enraptured, mounted chasseurs of theGuard who, breathless with delight, galloped ahead to clear a path forhim through the troops. On reaching the broad river Viliya, he stoppednear a regiment of Polish uhlans stationed by the river."Vivat!" shouted the Poles, ecstatically, breaking their ranks andpressing against one another to see him.Napoleon looked up and down the river, dismounted, and sat down on a logthat lay on the bank. At a mute sign from him, a telescope was handedhim which he rested on the back of a happy page who had run up to him,and he gazed at the opposite bank. Then he became absorbed in a map laidout on the logs. Without lifting his head he said something, and two ofhis aides-de-camp galloped off to the Polish uhlans."What? What did he say?" was heard in the ranks of the Polish uhlanswhen one of the aides-de-camp rode up to them.The order was to find a ford and to cross the river. The colonel of thePolish uhlans, a handsome old man, flushed and, fumbling in his speechfrom excitement, asked the aide-de-camp whether he would be permitted toswim the river with his uhlans instead of seeking a ford. In evidentfear of refusal, like a boy asking for permission to get on a horse, hebegged to be allowed to swim across the river before the Emperor's eyes.The aide-de-camp replied that probably the Emperor would not bedispleased at this excess of zeal.As soon as the aide-de-camp had said this, the old mustached officer,with happy face and sparkling eyes, raised his saber, shouted "Vivat!"and, commanding the uhlans to follow him, spurred his horse and gallopedinto the river. He gave an angry thrust to his horse, which had grownrestive under him, and plunged into the water, heading for the deepestpart where the current was swift. Hundreds of uhlans galloped in afterhim. It was cold and uncanny in the rapid current in the middle of thestream, and the uhlans caught hold of one another as they fell off theirhorses. Some of the horses were drowned and some of the men; the otherstried to swim on, some in the saddle and some clinging to their horses'manes. They tried to make their way forward to the opposite bank and,though there was a ford one third of a mile away, were proud that theywere swimming and drowning in this river under the eyes of the man whosat on the log and was not even looking at what they were doing. Whenthe aide-de-camp, having returned and choosing an opportune moment,ventured to draw the Emperor's attention to the devotion of the Poles tohis person, the little man in the gray overcoat got up and, havingsummoned Berthier, began pacing up and down the bank with him, givinghim instructions and occasionally glancing disapprovingly at thedrowning uhlans who distracted his attention.For him it was no new conviction that his presence in any part of theworld, from Africa to the steppes of Muscovy alike, was enough todumfound people and impel them to insane self-oblivion. He called forhis horse and rode to his quarters.Some forty uhlans were drowned in the river, though boats were sent totheir assistance. The majority struggled back to the bank from whichthey had started. The colonel and some of his men got across and withdifficulty clambered out on the further bank. And as soon as they hadgot out, in their soaked and streaming clothes, they shouted "Vivat!"and looked ecstatically at the spot where Napoleon had been but where heno longer was and at that moment considered themselves happy.That evening, between issuing one order that the forged Russian papermoney prepared for use in Russia should be delivered as quickly aspossible and another that a Saxon should be shot, on whom a lettercontaining information about the orders to the French army had beenfound, Napoleon also gave instructions that the Polish colonel who hadneedlessly plunged into the river should be enrolled in the Legiond'honneur of which Napoleon was himself the head.Quos vult perdere dementat. ** Those whom (God) wishes to destroy he drives mad.CHAPTER IIIThe Emperor of Russia had, meanwhile, been in Vilna for more than amonth, reviewing troops and holding maneuvers. Nothing was ready for thewar that everyone expected and to prepare for which the Emperor had comefrom Petersburg. There was no general plan of action. The vacillationbetween the various plans that were proposed had even increased afterthe Emperor had been at headquarters for a month. Each of the threearmies had its own commander-in-chief, but there was no supremecommander of all the forces, and the Emperor did not assume thatresponsibility himself.The longer the Emperor remained in Vilna the less did everybody--tiredof waiting--prepare for the war. All the efforts of those who surroundedthe sovereign seemed directed merely to making him spend his timepleasantly and forget that war was impending.In June, after many balls and fetes given by the Polish magnates, by thecourtiers, and by the Emperor himself, it occurred to one of the Polishaides-de-camp in attendance that a dinner and ball should be given forthe Emperor by his aides-de-camp. This idea was eagerly received. TheEmperor gave his consent. The aides-de-camp collected money bysubscription. The lady who was thought to be most pleasing to theEmperor was invited to act as hostess. Count Bennigsen, being alandowner in the Vilna province, offered his country house for the fete,and the thirteenth of June was fixed for a ball, dinner, regatta, andfireworks at Zakret, Count Bennigsen's country seat.The very day that Napoleon issued the order to cross the Niemen, and hisvanguard, driving off the Cossacks, crossed the Russian frontier,Alexander spent the evening at the entertainment given by his aides-de-camp at Bennigsen's country house.It was a gay and brilliant fete. Connoisseurs of such matters declaredthat rarely had so many beautiful women been assembled in one place.Countess Bezukhova was present among other Russian ladies who hadfollowed the sovereign from Petersburg to Vilna and eclipsed the refinedPolish ladies by her massive, so-called Russian type of beauty. TheEmperor noticed her and honored her with a dance.Boris Drubetskoy, having left his wife in Moscow and being for thepresent en garcon (as he phrased it), was also there and, though not anaide-de-camp, had subscribed a large sum toward the expenses. Boris wasnow a rich man who had risen to high honors and no longer soughtpatronage but stood on an equal footing with the highest of those of hisown age. He was meeting Helene in Vilna after not having seen her for along time and did not recall the past, but as Helene was enjoying thefavors of a very important personage and Boris had only recentlymarried, they met as good friends of long standing.At midnight dancing was still going on. Helene, not having a suitablepartner, herself offered to dance the mazurka with Boris. They were thethird couple. Boris, coolly looking at Helene's dazzling bare shoulderswhich emerged from a dark, gold-embroidered, gauze gown, talked to herof old acquaintances and at the same time, unaware of it himself andunnoticed by others, never for an instant ceased to observe the Emperorwho was in the same room. The Emperor was not dancing, he stood in thedoorway, stopping now one pair and now another with gracious words whichhe alone knew how to utter.As the mazurka began, Boris saw that Adjutant General Balashev, one ofthose in closest attendance on the Emperor, went up to him and contraryto court etiquette stood near him while he was talking to a Polish lady.Having finished speaking to her, the Emperor looked inquiringly atBalashev and, evidently understanding that he only acted thus becausethere were important reasons for so doing, nodded slightly to the ladyand turned to him. Hardly had Balashev begun to speak before a look ofamazement appeared on the Emperor's face. He took Balashev by the armand crossed the room with him, unconsciously clearing a path seven yardswide as the people on both sides made way for him. Boris noticedArakcheev's excited face when the sovereign went out with Balashev.Arakcheev looked at the Emperor from under his brow and, sniffing withhis red nose, stepped forward from the crowd as if expecting the Emperorto address him. (Boris understood that Arakcheev envied Balashev and wasdispleased that evidently important news had reached the Emperorotherwise than through himself.)But the Emperor and Balashev passed out into the illuminated gardenwithout noticing Arakcheev who, holding his sword and glancingwrathfully around, followed some twenty paces behind them.All the time Boris was going through the figures of the mazurka, he wasworried by the question of what news Balashev had brought and how hecould find it out before others. In the figure in which he had to choosetwo ladies, he whispered to Helene that he meant to choose CountessPotocka who, he thought, had gone out onto the veranda, and glided overthe parquet to the door opening into the garden, where, seeing Balashevand the Emperor returning to the veranda, he stood still. They weremoving toward the door. Boris, fluttering as if he had not had time towithdraw, respectfully pressed close to the doorpost with bowed head.The Emperor, with the agitation of one who has been personallyaffronted, was finishing with these words:"To enter Russia without declaring war! I will not make peace as long asa single armed enemy remains in my country!" It seemed to Boris that itgave the Emperor pleasure to utter these words. He was satisfied withthe form in which he had expressed his thoughts, but displeased thatBoris had overheard it."Let no one know of it!" the Emperor added with a frown.Boris understood that this was meant for him and, closing his eyes,slightly bowed his head. The Emperor re-entered the ballroom andremained there about another half-hour.Boris was thus the first to learn the news that the French army hadcrossed the Niemen and, thanks to this, was able to show certainimportant personages that much that was concealed from others wasusually known to him, and by this means he rose higher in theirestimation.The unexpected news of the French having crossed the Niemen wasparticularly startling after a month of unfulfilled expectations, and ata ball. On first receiving the news, under the influence of indignationand resentment the Emperor had found a phrase that pleased him, fullyexpressed his feelings, and has since become famous. On returning homeat two o'clock that night he sent for his secretary, Shishkov, and toldhim to write an order to the troops and a rescript to Field MarshalPrince Saltykov, in which he insisted on the words being inserted thathe would not make peace so long as a single armed Frenchman remained onRussian soil.Next day the following letter was sent to Napoleon:Monsieur mon frere,Yesterday I learned that, despite the loyalty with which I have kept myengagements with Your Majesty, your troops have crossed the Russianfrontier, and I have this moment received from Petersburg a note, inwhich Count Lauriston informs me, as a reason for this aggression, thatYour Majesty has considered yourself to be in a state of war with mefrom the time Prince Kuragin asked for his passports. The reasons onwhich the Duc de Bassano based his refusal to deliver them to him wouldnever have led me to suppose that that could serve as a pretext foraggression. In fact, the ambassador, as he himself has declared, wasnever authorized to make that demand, and as soon as I was informed ofit I let him know how much I disapproved of it and ordered him to remainat his post. If Your Majesty does not intend to shed the blood of ourpeoples for such a misunderstanding, and consents to withdraw yourtroops from Russian territory, I will regard what has passed as nothaving occurred and an understanding between us will be possible. In thecontrary case, Your Majesty, I shall see myself forced to repel anattack that nothing on my part has provoked. It still depends on YourMajesty to preserve humanity from the calamity of another war. I am,etc.,(signed) Alexander.CHAPTER IVAt two in the morning of the fourteenth of June, the Emperor, havingsent for Balashev and read him his letter to Napoleon, ordered him totake it and hand it personally to the French Emperor. When dispatchingBalashev, the Emperor repeated to him the words that he would not makepeace so long as a single armed enemy remained on Russian soil and toldhim to transmit those words to Napoleon. Alexander did not insert themin his letter to Napoleon, because with his characteristic tact he feltit would be injudicious to use them at a moment when a last attempt atreconciliation was being made, but he definitely instructed Balashev torepeat them personally to Napoleon.Having set off in the small hours of the fourteenth, accompanied by abugler and two Cossacks, Balashev reached the French outposts at thevillage of Rykonty, on the Russian side of the Niemen, by dawn. There hewas stopped by French cavalry sentinels.A French noncommissioned officer of hussars, in crimson uniform and ashaggy cap, shouted to the approaching Balashev to halt. Balashev didnot do so at once, but continued to advance along the road at a walkingpace.The noncommissioned officer frowned and, muttering words of abuse,advanced his horse's chest against Balashev, put his hand to his saber,and shouted rudely at the Russian general, asking: was he deaf that hedid not do as he was told? Balashev mentioned who he was. Thenoncommissioned officer began talking with his comrades about regimentalmatters without looking at the Russian general.After living at the seat of the highest authority and power, afterconversing with the Emperor less than three hours before, and in generalbeing accustomed to the respect due to his rank in the service, Balashevfound it very strange here on Russian soil to encounter this hostile,and still more this disrespectful, application of brute force tohimself.The sun was only just appearing from behind the clouds, the air wasfresh and dewy. A herd of cattle was being driven along the road fromthe village, and over the fields the larks rose trilling, one afteranother, like bubbles rising in water.Balashev looked around him, awaiting the arrival of an officer from thevillage. The Russian Cossacks and bugler and the French hussars lookedsilently at one another from time to time.A French colonel of hussars, who had evidently just left his bed, cameriding from the village on a handsome sleek gray horse, accompanied bytwo hussars. The officer, the soldiers, and their horses all lookedsmart and well kept.It was that first period of a campaign when troops are still in fulltrim, almost like that of peacetime maneuvers, but with a shade ofmartial swagger in their clothes, and a touch of the gaiety and spiritof enterprise which always accompany the opening of a campaign.The French colonel with difficulty repressed a yawn, but was polite andevidently understood Balashev's importance. He led him past his soldiersand behind the outposts and told him that his wish to be presented tothe Emperor would most likely be satisfied immediately, as the Emperor'squarters were, he believed, not far off.They rode through the village of Rykonty, past tethered French hussarhorses, past sentinels and men who saluted their colonel and stared withcuriosity at a Russian uniform, and came out at the other end of thevillage. The colonel said that the commander of the division was a mileand a quarter away and would receive Balashev and conduct him to hisdestination.The sun had by now risen and shone gaily on the bright verdure.They had hardly ridden up a hill, past a tavern, before they saw a groupof horsemen coming toward them. In front of the group, on a black horsewith trappings that glittered in the sun, rode a tall man with plumes inhis hat and black hair curling down to his shoulders. He wore a redmantle, and stretched his long legs forward in French fashion. This manrode toward Balashev at a gallop, his plumes flowing and his gems andgold lace glittering in the bright June sunshine.Balashev was only two horses' length from the equestrian with thebracelets, plumes, necklaces, and gold embroidery, who was gallopingtoward him with a theatrically solemn countenance, when Julner, theFrench colonel, whispered respectfully: "The King of Naples!" It was, infact, Murat, now called "King of Naples." Though it was quiteincomprehensible why he should be King of Naples, he was called so, andwas himself convinced that he was so, and therefore assumed a moresolemn and important air than formerly. He was so sure that he reallywas the King of Naples that when, on the eve of his departure from thatcity, while walking through the streets with his wife, some Italianscalled out to him: "Viva il re!" * he turned to his wife with a pensivesmile and said: "Poor fellows, they don't know that I am leaving themtomorrow!"* "Long live the king."But though he firmly believed himself to be King of Naples and pitiedthe grief felt by the subjects he was abandoning, latterly, after he hadbeen ordered to return to military service--and especially since hislast interview with Napoleon in Danzig, when his august brother-in-lawhad told him: "I made you King that you should reign in my way, but notin yours!"--he had cheerfully taken up his familiar business, and--likea well-fed but not overfat horse that feels himself in harness and growsskittish between the shafts--he dressed up in clothes as variegated andexpensive as possible, and gaily and contentedly galloped along theroads of Poland, without himself knowing why or whither.On seeing the Russian general he threw back his head, with its long haircurling to his shoulders, in a majestically royal manner, and lookedinquiringly at the French colonel. The colonel respectfully informed HisMajesty of Balashev's mission, whose name he could not pronounce."De Bal-macheve!" said the King (overcoming by his assurance thedifficulty that had presented itself to the colonel). "Charmed to makeyour acquaintance, General!" he added, with a gesture of kinglycondescension.As soon as the King began to speak loud and fast his royal dignityinstantly forsook him, and without noticing it he passed into hisnatural tone of good-natured familiarity. He laid his hand on thewithers of Balashev's horse and said:"Well, General, it all looks like war," as if regretting a circumstanceof which he was unable to judge."Your Majesty," replied Balashev, "my master, the Emperor, does notdesire war and as Your Majesty sees..." said Balashev, using the wordsYour Majesty at every opportunity, with the affectation unavoidable infrequently addressing one to whom the title was still a novelty.Murat's face beamed with stupid satisfaction as he listened to "Monsieurde Bal-macheve." But royaute oblige! * and he felt it incumbent on him,as a king and an ally, to confer on state affairs with Alexander'senvoy. He dismounted, took Balashev's arm, and moving a few steps awayfrom his suite, which waited respectfully, began to pace up and downwith him, trying to speak significantly. He referred to the fact thatthe Emperor Napoleon had resented the demand that he should withdraw histroops from Prussia, especially when that demand became generally knownand the dignity of France was thereby offended.* "Royalty has its obligations."Balashev replied that there was "nothing offensive in the demand,because..." but Murat interrupted him."Then you don't consider the Emperor Alexander the aggressor?" he askedunexpectedly, with a kindly and foolish smile.Balashev told him why he considered Napoleon to be the originator of thewar."Oh, my dear general!" Murat again interrupted him, "with all my heart Iwish the Emperors may arrange the affair between them, and that the warbegun by no wish of mine may finish as quickly as possible!" said he, inthe tone of a servant who wants to remain good friends with anotherdespite a quarrel between their masters.And he went on to inquiries about the Grand Duke and the state of hishealth, and to reminiscences of the gay and amusing times he had spentwith him in Naples. Then suddenly, as if remembering his royal dignity,Murat solemnly drew himself up, assumed the pose in which he had stoodat his coronation, and, waving his right arm, said:"I won't detain you longer, General. I wish success to your mission,"and with his embroidered red mantle, his flowing feathers, and hisglittering ornaments, he rejoined his suite who were respectfullyawaiting him.Balashev rode on, supposing from Murat's words that he would very soonbe brought before Napoleon himself. But instead of that, at the nextvillage the sentinels of Davout's infantry corps detained him as thepickets of the vanguard had done, and an adjutant of the corpscommander, who was fetched, conducted him into the village to MarshalDavout.CHAPTER VDavout was to Napoleon what Arakcheev was to Alexander--though not acoward like Arakcheev, he was as precise, as cruel, and as unable toexpress his devotion to his monarch except by cruelty.In the organism of states such men are necessary, as wolves arenecessary in the organism of nature, and they always exist, alwaysappear and hold their own, however incongruous their presence and theirproximity to the head of the government may be. This inevitability alonecan explain how the cruel Arakcheev, who tore out a grenadier's mustachewith his own hands, whose weak nerves rendered him unable to facedanger, and who was neither an educated man nor a courtier, was able tomaintain his powerful position with Alexander, whose own character waschivalrous, noble, and gentle.Balashev found Davout seated on a barrel in the shed of a peasant's hut,writing--he was auditing accounts. Better quarters could have been foundhim, but Marshal Davout was one of those men who purposely putthemselves in most depressing conditions to have a justification forbeing gloomy. For the same reason they are always hard at work and in ahurry. "How can I think of the bright side of life when, as you see, Iam sitting on a barrel and working in a dirty shed?" the expression ofhis face seemed to say. The chief pleasure and necessity of such men,when they encounter anyone who shows animation, is to flaunt their owndreary, persistent activity. Davout allowed himself that pleasure whenBalashev was brought in. He became still more absorbed in his task whenthe Russian general entered, and after glancing over his spectacles atBalashev's face, which was animated by the beauty of the morning and byhis talk with Murat, he did not rise or even stir, but scowled stillmore and sneered malevolently.When he noticed in Balashev's face the disagreeable impression thisreception produced, Davout raised his head and coldly asked what hewanted.Thinking he could have been received in such a manner only becauseDavout did not know that he was adjutant general to the EmperorAlexander and even his envoy to Napoleon, Balashev hastened to informhim of his rank and mission. Contrary to his expectation, Davout, afterhearing him, became still surlier and ruder."Where is your dispatch?" he inquired. "Give it to me. I will send it tothe Emperor."Balashev replied that he had been ordered to hand it personally to theEmperor."Your Emperor's orders are obeyed in your army, but here," said Davout,"you must do as you're told."And, as if to make the Russian general still more conscious of hisdependence on brute force, Davout sent an adjutant to call the officeron duty.Balashev took out the packet containing the Emperor's letter and laid iton the table (made of a door with its hinges still hanging on it, laidacross two barrels). Davout took the packet and read the inscription."You are perfectly at liberty to treat me with respect or not,"protested Balashev, "but permit me to observe that I have the honor tobe adjutant general to His Majesty...."Davout glanced at him silently and plainly derived pleasure from thesigns of agitation and confusion which appeared on Balashev's face."You will be treated as is fitting," said he and, putting the packet inhis pocket, left the shed.A minute later the marshal's adjutant, de Castres, came in and conductedBalashev to the quarters assigned him.That day he dined with the marshal, at the same board on the barrels.Next day Davout rode out early and, after asking Balashev to come tohim, peremptorily requested him to remain there, to move on with thebaggage train should orders come for it to move, and to talk to no oneexcept Monsieur de Castres.After four days of solitude, ennui, and consciousness of his impotenceand insignificance--particularly acute by contrast with the sphere ofpower in which he had so lately moved--and after several marches withthe marshal's baggage and the French army, which occupied the wholedistrict, Balashev was brought to Vilna--now occupied by the French--through the very gate by which he had left it four days previously.Next day the imperial gentleman-in-waiting, the Comte de Turenne, cameto Balashev and informed him of the Emperor Napoleon's wish to honor himwith an audience.Four days before, sentinels of the Preobrazhensk regiment had stood infront of the house to which Balashev was conducted, and now two Frenchgrenadiers stood there in blue uniforms unfastened in front and withshaggy caps on their heads, and an escort of hussars and uhlans and abrilliant suite of aides-de-camp, pages, and generals, who were waitingfor Napoleon to come out, were standing at the porch, round his saddlehorse and his Mameluke, Rustan. Napoleon received Balashev in the veryhouse in Vilna from which Alexander had dispatched him on his mission.CHAPTER VIThough Balashev was used to imperial pomp, he was amazed at the luxuryand magnificence of Napoleon's court.The Comte de Turenne showed him into a big reception room where manygenerals, gentlemen-in-waiting, and Polish magnates--several of whomBalashev had seen at the court of the Emperor of Russia--were waiting.Duroc said that Napoleon would receive the Russian general before goingfor his ride.After some minutes, the gentleman-in-waiting who was on duty came intothe great reception room and, bowing politely, asked Balashev to followhim.Balashev went into a small reception room, one door of which led into astudy, the very one from which the Russian Emperor had dispatched him onhis mission. He stood a minute or two, waiting. He heard hurriedfootsteps beyond the door, both halves of it were opened rapidly; allwas silent and then from the study the sound was heard of other steps,firm and resolute--they were those of Napoleon. He had just finisheddressing for his ride, and wore a blue uniform, opening in front over awhite waistcoat so long that it covered his rotund stomach, whiteleather breeches tightly fitting the fat thighs of his short legs, andHessian boots. His short hair had evidently just been brushed, but onelock hung down in the middle of his broad forehead. His plump white neckstood out sharply above the black collar of his uniform, and he smelledof Eau de Cologne. His full face, rather young-looking, with itsprominent chin, wore a gracious and majestic expression of imperialwelcome.He entered briskly, with a jerk at every step and his head slightlythrown back. His whole short corpulent figure with broad thickshoulders, and chest and stomach involuntarily protruding, had thatimposing and stately appearance one sees in men of forty who live incomfort. It was evident, too, that he was in the best of spirits thatday.He nodded in answer to Balashav's low and respectful bow, and coming upto him at once began speaking like a man who values every moment of histime and does not condescend to prepare what he has to say but is surehe will always say the right thing and say it well."Good day, General!" said he. "I have received the letter you broughtfrom the Emperor Alexander and am very glad to see you." He glanced withhis large eyes into Balashav's face and immediately looked past him.It was plain that Balashev's personality did not interest him at all.Evidently only what took place within his own mind interested him.Nothing outside himself had any significance for him, because everythingin the world, it seemed to him, depended entirely on his will."I do not, and did not, desire war," he continued, "but it has beenforced on me. Even now" (he emphasized the word) "I am ready to receiveany explanations you can give me."And he began clearly and concisely to explain his reasons fordissatisfaction with the Russian government. Judging by the calmlymoderate and amicable tone in which the French Emperor spoke, Balashevwas firmly persuaded that he wished for peace and intended to enter intonegotiations.When Napoleon, having finished speaking, looked inquiringly at theRussian envoy, Balashev began a speech he had prepared long before:"Sire! The Emperor, my master..." but the sight of the Emperor's eyesbent on him confused him. "You are flurried--compose yourself!" Napoleonseemed to say, as with a scarcely perceptible smile he looked atBalashev's uniform and sword.Balashev recovered himself and began to speak. He said that the EmperorAlexander did not consider Kurakin's demand for his passports asufficient cause for war; that Kurakin had acted on his own initiativeand without his sovereign's assent, that the Emperor Alexander did notdesire war, and had no relations with England."Not yet!" interposed Napoleon, and, as if fearing to give vent to hisfeelings, he frowned and nodded slightly as a sign that Balashev mightproceed.After saying all he had been instructed to say, Balashev added that theEmperor Alexander wished for peace, but would not enter intonegotiations except on condition that... Here Balashev hesitated: heremembered the words the Emperor Alexander had not written in hisletter, but had specially inserted in the rescript to Saltykov and hadtold Balashev to repeat to Napoleon. Balashev remembered these words,"So long as a single armed foe remains on Russian soil," but somecomplex feeling restrained him. He could not utter them, though hewished to do so. He grew confused and said: "On condition that theFrench army retires beyond the Niemen."Napoleon noticed Balashev's embarrassment when uttering these lastwords; his face twitched and the calf of his left leg began to quiverrhythmically. Without moving from where he stood he began speaking in alouder tone and more hurriedly than before. During the speech thatfollowed, Balashev, who more than once lowered his eyes, involuntarilynoticed the quivering of Napoleon's left leg which increased the moreNapoleon raised his voice."I desire peace, no less than the Emperor Alexander," he began. "Have Inot for eighteen months been doing everything to obtain it? I havewaited eighteen months for explanations. But in order to beginnegotiations, what is demanded of me?" he said, frowning and making anenergetic gesture of inquiry with his small white plump hand."The withdrawal of your army beyond the Niemen, sire," replied Balashev."The Niemen?" repeated Napoleon. "So now you want me to retire beyondthe Niemen--only the Niemen?" repeated Napoleon, looking straight atBalashev.The latter bowed his head respectfully.Instead of the demand of four months earlier to withdraw from Pomerania,only a withdrawal beyond the Niemen was now demanded. Napoleon turnedquickly and began to pace the room."You say the demand now is that I am to withdraw beyond the Niemenbefore commencing negotiations, but in just the same way two months agothe demand was that I should withdraw beyond the Vistula and the Oder,and yet you are willing to negotiate."He went in silence from one corner of the room to the other and againstopped in front of Balashev. Balashev noticed that his left leg wasquivering faster than before and his face seemed petrified in its sternexpression. This quivering of his left leg was a thing Napoleon wasconscious of. "The vibration of my left calf is a great sign with me,"he remarked at a later date."Such demands as to retreat beyond the Vistula and Oder may be made to aPrince of Baden, but not to me!" Napoleon almost screamed, quite to hisown surprise. "If you gave me Petersburg and Moscow I could not acceptsuch conditions. You say I have begun this war! But who first joined hisarmy? The Emperor Alexander, not I! And you offer me negotiations when Ihave expended millions, when you are in alliance with England, and whenyour position is a bad one. You offer me negotiations! But what is theaim of your alliance with England? What has she given you?" he continuedhurriedly, evidently no longer trying to show the advantages of peaceand discuss its possibility, but only to prove his own rectitude andpower and Alexander's errors and duplicity.The commencement of his speech had obviously been made with theintention of demonstrating the advantages of his position and showingthat he was nevertheless willing to negotiate. But he had begun talking,and the more he talked the less could he control his words.The whole purport of his remarks now was evidently to exalt himself andinsult Alexander--just what he had least desired at the commencement ofthe interview."I hear you have made peace with Turkey?"Balashev bowed his head affirmatively."Peace has been concluded..." he began.But Napoleon did not let him speak. He evidently wanted to do all thetalking himself, and continued to talk with the sort of eloquence andunrestrained irritability to which spoiled people are so prone."Yes, I know you have made peace with the Turks without obtainingMoldavia and Wallachia; I would have given your sovereign thoseprovinces as I gave him Finland. Yes," he went on, "I promised and wouldhave given the Emperor Alexander Moldavia and Wallachia, and now hewon't have those splendid provinces. Yet he might have united them tohis empire and in a single reign would have extended Russia from theGulf of Bothnia to the mouths of the Danube. Catherine the Great couldnot have done more," said Napoleon, growing more and more excited as hepaced up and down the room, repeating to Balashev almost the very wordshe had used to Alexander himself at Tilsit. "All that, he would haveowed to my friendship. Oh, what a splendid reign!" he repeated severaltimes, then paused, drew from his pocket a gold snuffbox, lifted it tohis nose, and greedily sniffed at it."What a splendid reign the Emperor Alexander's might have been!"He looked compassionately at Balashev, and as soon as the latter triedto make some rejoinder hastily interrupted him."What could he wish or look for that he would not have obtained throughmy friendship?" demanded Napoleon, shrugging his shoulders inperplexity. "But no, he has preferred to surround himself with myenemies, and with whom? With Steins, Armfeldts, Bennigsens, andWintzingerodes! Stein, a traitor expelled from his own country;Armfeldt, a rake and an intriguer; Wintzingerode, a fugitive Frenchsubject; Bennigsen, rather more of a soldier than the others, but allthe same an incompetent who was unable to do anything in 1807 and whoshould awaken terrible memories in the Emperor Alexander's mind....Granted that were they competent they might be made use of," continuedNapoleon--hardly able to keep pace in words with the rush of thoughtsthat incessantly sprang up, proving how right and strong he was (in hisperception the two were one and the same)--"but they are not even that!They are neither fit for war nor peace! Barclay is said to be the mostcapable of them all, but I cannot say so, judging by his firstmovements. And what are they doing, all these courtiers? Pfuel proposes,Armfeldt disputes, Bennigsen considers, and Barclay, called on to act,does not know what to decide on, and time passes bringing no result.Bagration alone is a military man. He's stupid, but he has experience, aquick eye, and resolution.... And what role is your young monarchplaying in that monstrous crowd? They compromise him and throw on himthe responsibility for all that happens. A sovereign should not be withthe army unless he is a general!" said Napoleon, evidently utteringthese words as a direct challenge to the Emperor. He knew how Alexanderdesired to be a military commander."The campaign began only a week ago, and you haven't even been able todefend Vilna. You are cut in two and have been driven out of the Polishprovinces. Your army is grumbling.""On the contrary, Your Majesty," said Balashev, hardly able to rememberwhat had been said to him and following these verbal fireworks withdifficulty, "the troops are burning with eagerness...""I know everything!" Napoleon interrupted him. "I know everything. Iknow the number of your battalions as exactly as I know my own. You havenot two hundred thousand men, and I have three times that number. I giveyou my word of honor," said Napoleon, forgetting that his word of honorcould carry no weight--"I give you my word of honor that I have fivehundred and thirty thousand men this side of the Vistula. The Turks willbe of no use to you; they are worth nothing and have shown it by makingpeace with you. As for the Swedes--it is their fate to be governed bymad kings. Their king was insane and they changed him for another--Bernadotte, who promptly went mad--for no Swede would ally himself withRussia unless he were mad."Napoleon grinned maliciously and again raised his snuffbox to his nose.Balashev knew how to reply to each of Napoleon's remarks, and would havedone so; he continually made the gesture of a man wishing to saysomething, but Napoleon always interrupted him. To the alleged insanityof the Swedes, Balashev wished to reply that when Russia is on her sideSweden is practically an island: but Napoleon gave an angry exclamationto drown his voice. Napoleon was in that state of irritability in whicha man has to talk, talk, and talk, merely to convince himself that he isin the right. Balashev began to feel uncomfortable: as envoy he fearedto demean his dignity and felt the necessity of replying; but, as a man,he shrank before the transport of groundless wrath that had evidentlyseized Napoleon. He knew that none of the words now uttered by Napoleonhad any significance, and that Napoleon himself would be ashamed of themwhen he came to his senses. Balashev stood with downcast eyes, lookingat the movements of Napoleon's stout legs and trying to avoid meetinghis eyes."But what do I care about your allies?" said Napoleon. "I have allies--the Poles. There are eighty thousand of them and they fight like lions.And there will be two hundred thousand of them."And probably still more perturbed by the fact that he had uttered thisobvious falsehood, and that Balashev still stood silently before him inthe same attitude of submission to fate, Napoleon abruptly turned round,drew close to Balashev's face, and, gesticulating rapidly andenergetically with his white hands, almost shouted:"Know that if you stir up Prussia against me, I'll wipe it off the mapof Europe!" he declared, his face pale and distorted by anger, and hestruck one of his small hands energetically with the other. "Yes, I willthrow you back beyond the Dvina and beyond the Dnieper, and will re-erect against you that barrier which it was criminal and blind of Europeto allow to be destroyed. Yes, that is what will happen to you. That iswhat you have gained by alienating me!" And he walked silently severaltimes up and down the room, his fat shoulders twitching.He put his snuffbox into his waistcoat pocket, took it out again, liftedit several times to his nose, and stopped in front of Balashev. Hepaused, looked ironically straight into Balashev's eyes, and said in aquiet voice:"And yet what a splendid reign your master might have had!"Balashev, feeling it incumbent on him to reply, said that from theRussian side things did not appear in so gloomy a light. Napoleon wassilent, still looking derisively at him and evidently not listening tohim. Balashev said that in Russia the best results were expected fromthe war. Napoleon nodded condescendingly, as if to say, "I know it'syour duty to say that, but you don't believe it yourself. I haveconvinced you."When Balashev had ended, Napoleon again took out his snuffbox, sniffedat it, and stamped his foot twice on the floor as a signal. The dooropened, a gentleman-in-waiting, bending respectfully, handed the Emperorhis hat and gloves; another brought him a pocket handkerchief. Napoleon,without giving them a glance, turned to Balashev:"Assure the Emperor Alexander from me," said he, taking his hat, "that Iam as devoted to him as before: I know him thoroughly and very highlyesteem his lofty qualities. I will detain you no longer, General; youshall receive my letter to the Emperor."And Napoleon went quickly to the door. Everyone in the reception roomrushed forward and descended the staircase.CHAPTER VIIAfter all that Napoleon had said to him--those bursts of anger and thelast dryly spoken words: "I will detain you no longer, General; youshall receive my letter," Balashev felt convinced that Napoleon wouldnot wish to see him, and would even avoid another meeting with him--aninsulted envoy--especially as he had witnessed his unseemly anger. But,to his surprise, Balashev received, through Duroc, an invitation to dinewith the Emperor that day.Bessieres, Caulaincourt, and Berthier were present at that dinner.Napoleon met Balashev cheerfully and amiably. He not only showed no signof constraint or self-reproach on account of his outburst that morning,but, on the contrary, tried to reassure Balashev. It was evident that hehad long been convinced that it was impossible for him to make amistake, and that in his perception whatever he did was right, notbecause it harmonized with any idea of right and wrong, but because hedid it.The Emperor was in very good spirits after his ride through Vilna, wherecrowds of people had rapturously greeted and followed him. From all thewindows of the streets through which he rode, rugs, flags, and hismonogram were displayed, and the Polish ladies, welcoming him, wavedtheir handkerchiefs to him.At dinner, having placed Balashev beside him, Napoleon not only treatedhim amiably but behaved as if Balashev were one of his own courtiers,one of those who sympathized with his plans and ought to rejoice at hissuccess. In the course of conversation he mentioned Moscow andquestioned Balashev about the Russian capital, not merely as aninterested traveler asks about a new city he intends to visit, but as ifconvinced that Balashev, as a Russian, must be flattered by hiscuriosity."How many inhabitants are there in Moscow? How many houses? Is it truethat Moscow is called 'Holy Moscow'? How many churches are there inMoscow?" he asked.And receiving the reply that there were more than two hundred churches,he remarked:"Why such a quantity of churches?""The Russians are very devout," replied Balashev."But a large number of monasteries and churches is always a sign of thebackwardness of a people," said Napoleon, turning to Caulaincourt forappreciation of this remark.Balashev respectfully ventured to disagree with the French Emperor."Every country has its own character," said he."But nowhere in Europe is there anything like that," said Napoleon."I beg your Majesty's pardon," returned Balashev, "besides Russia thereis Spain, where there are also many churches and monasteries."This reply of Balashev's, which hinted at the recent defeats of theFrench in Spain, was much appreciated when he related it at Alexander'scourt, but it was not much appreciated at Napoleon's dinner, where itpassed unnoticed.The uninterested and perplexed faces of the marshals showed that theywere puzzled as to what Balashev's tone suggested. "If there is a pointwe don't see it, or it is not at all witty," their expressions seemed tosay. So little was his rejoinder appreciated that Napoleon did notnotice it at all and naively asked Balashev through what towns thedirect road from there to Moscow passed. Balashev, who was on the alertall through the dinner, replied that just as "all roads lead to Rome,"so all roads lead to Moscow: there were many roads, and "among them theroad through Poltava, which Charles XII chose." Balashev involuntarilyflushed with pleasure at the aptitude of this reply, but hardly had heuttered the word Poltava before Caulaincourt began speaking of thebadness of the road from Petersburg to Moscow and of his Petersburgreminiscences.After dinner they went to drink coffee in Napoleon's study, which fourdays previously had been that of the Emperor Alexander. Napoleon satdown, toying with his Sevres coffee cup, and motioned Balashev to achair beside him.Napoleon was in that well-known after-dinner mood which, more than anyreasoned cause, makes a man contented with himself and disposed toconsider everyone his friend. It seemed to him that he was surrounded bymen who adored him: and he felt convinced that, after his dinner,Balashev too was his friend and worshiper. Napoleon turned to him with apleasant, though slightly ironic, smile."They tell me this is the room the Emperor Alexander occupied? Strange,isn't it, General?" he said, evidently not doubting that this remarkwould be agreeable to his hearer since it went to prove his, Napoleon's,superiority to Alexander.Balashev made no reply and bowed his head in silence."Yes. Four days ago in this room, Wintzingerode and Stein weredeliberating," continued Napoleon with the same derisive and self-confident smile. "What I can't understand," he went on, "is that theEmperor Alexander has surrounded himself with my personal enemies. ThatI do not... understand. Has he not thought that I may do the same?" andhe turned inquiringly to Balashev, and evidently this thought turned himback on to the track of his morning's anger, which was still fresh inhim."And let him know that I will do so!" said Napoleon, rising and pushinghis cup away with his hand. "I'll drive all his Wurttemberg, Baden, andWeimar relations out of Germany.... Yes. I'll drive them out. Let himprepare an asylum for them in Russia!"Balashev bowed his head with an air indicating that he would like tomake his bow and leave, and only listened because he could not helphearing what was said to him. Napoleon did not notice this expression;he treated Balashev not as an envoy from his enemy, but as a man nowfully devoted to him and who must rejoice at his former master'shumiliation."And why has the Emperor Alexander taken command of the armies? What isthe good of that? War is my profession, but his business is to reign andnot to command armies! Why has he taken on himself such aresponsibility?"Again Napoleon brought out his snuffbox, paced several times up and downthe room in silence, and then, suddenly and unexpectedly, went up toBalashev and with a slight smile, as confidently, quickly, and simply asif he were doing something not merely important but pleasing toBalashev, he raised his hand to the forty-year-old Russian general'sface and, taking him by the ear, pulled it gently, smiling with his lipsonly.To have one's ear pulled by the Emperor was considered the greatesthonor and mark of favor at the French court."Well, adorer and courtier of the Emperor Alexander, why don't you sayanything?" said he, as if it was ridiculous, in his presence, to be theadorer and courtier of anyone but himself, Napoleon. "Are the horsesready for the general?" he added, with a slight inclination of his headin reply to Balashev's bow. "Let him have mine, he has a long way togo!"The letter taken by Balashev was the last Napoleon sent to Alexander.Every detail of the interview was communicated to the Russian monarch,and the war began...CHAPTER VIIIAfter his interview with Pierre in Moscow, Prince Andrew went toPetersburg, on business as he told his family, but really to meetAnatole Kuragin whom he felt it necessary to encounter. On reachingPetersburg he inquired for Kuragin but the latter had already left thecity. Pierre had warned his brother-in-law that Prince Andrew was on histrack. Anatole Kuragin promptly obtained an appointment from theMinister of War and went to join the army in Moldavia. While inPetersburg Prince Andrew met Kutuzov, his former commander who wasalways well disposed toward him, and Kutuzov suggested that he shouldaccompany him to the army in Moldavia, to which the old general had beenappointed commander-in-chief. So Prince Andrew, having received anappointment on the headquarters staff, left for Turkey.Prince Andrew did not think it proper to write and challenge Kuragin. Hethought that if he challenged him without some fresh cause it mightcompromise the young Countess Rostova and so he wanted to meet Kuraginpersonally in order to find a fresh pretext for a duel. But he againfailed to meet Kuragin in Turkey, for soon after Prince Andrew arrived,the latter returned to Russia. In a new country, amid new conditions,Prince Andrew found life easier to bear. After his betrothed had brokenfaith with him--which he felt the more acutely the more he tried toconceal its effects--the surroundings in which he had been happy becametrying to him, and the freedom and independence he had once prized sohighly were still more so. Not only could he no longer think thethoughts that had first come to him as he lay gazing at the sky on thefield of Austerlitz and had later enlarged upon with Pierre, and whichhad filled his solitude at Bogucharovo and then in Switzerland and Rome,but he even dreaded to recall them and the bright and boundless horizonsthey had revealed. He was now concerned only with the nearest practicalmatters unrelated to his past interests, and he seized on these the moreeagerly the more those past interests were closed to him. It was as ifthat lofty, infinite canopy of heaven that had once towered above himhad suddenly turned into a low, solid vault that weighed him down, inwhich all was clear, but nothing eternal or mysterious.Of the activities that presented themselves to him, army service was thesimplest and most familiar. As a general on duty on Kutuzov's staff, heapplied himself to business with zeal and perseverance and surprisedKutuzov by his willingness and accuracy in work. Not having foundKuragin in Turkey, Prince Andrew did not think it necessary to rush backto Russia after him, but all the same he knew that however long it mightbe before he met Kuragin, despite his contempt for him and despite allthe proofs he deduced to convince himself that it was not worth stoopingto a conflict with him--he knew that when he did meet him he would notbe able to resist calling him out, any more than a ravenous man can helpsnatching at food. And the consciousness that the insult was not yetavenged, that his rancor was still unspent, weighed on his heart andpoisoned the artificial tranquillity which he managed to obtain inTurkey by means of restless, plodding, and rather vainglorious andambitious activity.In the year 1812, when news of the war with Napoleon reached Bucharest--where Kutuzov had been living for two months, passing his days andnights with a Wallachian woman--Prince Andrew asked Kutuzov to transferhim to the Western Army. Kutuzov, who was already weary of Bolkonski'sactivity which seemed to reproach his own idleness, very readily let himgo and gave him a mission to Barclay de Tolly.Before joining the Western Army which was then, in May, encamped atDrissa, Prince Andrew visited Bald Hills which was directly on his way,being only two miles off the Smolensk highroad. During the last threeyears there had been so many changes in his life, he had thought, felt,and seen so much (having traveled both in the east and the west), thaton reaching Bald Hills it struck him as strange and unexpected to findthe way of life there unchanged and still the same in every detail. Heentered through the gates with their stone pillars and drove up theavenue leading to the house as if he were entering an enchanted,sleeping castle. The same old stateliness, the same cleanliness, thesame stillness reigned there, and inside there was the same furniture,the same walls, sounds, and smell, and the same timid faces, onlysomewhat older. Princess Mary was still the same timid, plain maidengetting on in years, uselessly and joylessly passing the best years ofher life in fear and constant suffering. Mademoiselle Bourienne was thesame coquettish, self-satisfied girl, enjoying every moment of herexistence and full of joyous hopes for the future. She had merely becomemore self-confident, Prince Andrew thought. Dessalles, the tutor he hadbrought from Switzerland, was wearing a coat of Russian cut and talkingbroken Russian to the servants, but was still the same narrowlyintelligent, conscientious, and pedantic preceptor. The old prince hadchanged in appearance only by the loss of a tooth, which left anoticeable gap on one side of his mouth; in character he was the same asever, only showing still more irritability and skepticism as to what washappening in the world. Little Nicholas alone had changed. He had grown,become rosier, had curly dark hair, and, when merry and laughing, quiteunconsciously lifted the upper lip of his pretty little mouth just asthe little princess used to do. He alone did not obey the law ofimmutability in the enchanted, sleeping castle. But though externallyall remained as of old, the inner relations of all these people hadchanged since Prince Andrew had seen them last. The household wasdivided into two alien and hostile camps, who changed their habits forhis sake and only met because he was there. To the one camp belonged theold prince, Mademoiselle Bourienne, and the architect; to the otherPrincess Mary, Dessalles, little Nicholas, and all the old nurses andmaids.During his stay at Bald Hills all the family dined together, but theywere ill at ease and Prince Andrew felt that he was a visitor for whosesake an exception was being made and that his presence made them allfeel awkward. Involuntarily feeling this at dinner on the first day, hewas taciturn, and the old prince noticing this also became morosely dumband retired to his apartments directly after dinner. In the evening,when Prince Andrew went to him and, trying to rouse him, began to tellhim of the young Count Kamensky's campaign, the old prince beganunexpectedly to talk about Princess Mary, blaming her for hersuperstitions and her dislike of Mademoiselle Bourienne, who, he said,was the only person really attached to him.The old prince said that if he was ill it was only because of PrincessMary: that she purposely worried and irritated him, and that byindulgence and silly talk she was spoiling little Prince Nicholas. Theold prince knew very well that he tormented his daughter and that herlife was very hard, but he also knew that he could not help tormentingher and that she deserved it. "Why does Prince Andrew, who sees this,say nothing to me about his sister? Does he think me a scoundrel, or anold fool who, without any reason, keeps his own daughter at a distanceand attaches this Frenchwoman to himself? He doesn't understand, so Imust explain it, and he must hear me out," thought the old prince. Andhe began explaining why he could not put up with his daughter'sunreasonable character."If you ask me," said Prince Andrew, without looking up (he wascensuring his father for the first time in his life), "I did not wish tospeak about it, but as you ask me I will give you my frank opinion. Ifthere is any misunderstanding and discord between you and Mary, I can'tblame her for it at all. I know how she loves and respects you. Sinceyou ask me," continued Prince Andrew, becoming irritable--as he wasalways liable to do of late--"I can only say that if there are anymisunderstandings they are caused by that worthless woman, who is notfit to be my sister's companion."The old man at first stared fixedly at his son, and an unnatural smiledisclosed the fresh gap between his teeth to which Prince Andrew couldnot get accustomed."What companion, my dear boy? Eh? You've already been talking it over!Eh?""Father, I did not want to judge," said Prince Andrew, in a hard andbitter tone, "but you challenged me, and I have said, and always shallsay, that Mary is not to blame, but those to blame--the one to blame--isthat Frenchwoman.""Ah, he has passed judgment... passed judgement!" said the old man in alow voice and, as it seemed to Prince Andrew, with some embarrassment,but then he suddenly jumped up and cried: "Be off, be off! Let not atrace of you remain here!..."Prince Andrew wished to leave at once, but Princess Mary persuaded himto stay another day. That day he did not see his father, who did notleave his room and admitted no one but Mademoiselle Bourienne andTikhon, but asked several times whether his son had gone. Next day,before leaving, Prince Andrew went to his son's rooms. The boy, curly-headed like his mother and glowing with health, sat on his knee, andPrince Andrew began telling him the story of Bluebeard, but fell into areverie without finishing the story. He thought not of this prettychild, his son whom he held on his knee, but of himself. He sought inhimself either remorse for having angered his father or regret atleaving home for the first time in his life on bad terms with him, andwas horrified to find neither. What meant still more to him was that hesought and did not find in himself the former tenderness for his sonwhich he had hoped to reawaken by caressing the boy and taking him onhis knee."Well, go on!" said his son.Prince Andrew, without replying, put him down from his knee and went outof the room.As soon as Prince Andrew had given up his daily occupations, andespecially on returning to the old conditions of life amid which he hadbeen happy, weariness of life overcame him with its former intensity,and he hastened to escape from these memories and to find some work assoon as possible."So you've decided to go, Andrew?" asked his sister."Thank God that I can," replied Prince Andrew. "I am very sorry youcan't.""Why do you say that?" replied Princess Mary. "Why do you say that, whenyou are going to this terrible war, and he is so old? MademoiselleBourienne says he has been asking about you...."As soon as she began to speak of that, her lips trembled and her tearsbegan to fall. Prince Andrew turned away and began pacing the room."Ah, my God! my God! When one thinks who and what--what trash--can causepeople misery!" he said with a malignity that alarmed Princess Mary.She understood that when speaking of "trash" he referred not only toMademoiselle Bourienne, the cause of her misery, but also to the man whohad ruined his own happiness."Andrew! One thing I beg, I entreat of you!" she said, touching hiselbow and looking at him with eyes that shone through her tears. "Iunderstand you" (she looked down). "Don't imagine that sorrow is thework of men. Men are His tools." She looked a little above PrinceAndrew's head with the confident, accustomed look with which one looksat the place where a familiar portrait hangs. "Sorrow is sent by Him,not by men. Men are His instruments, they are not to blame. If you thinksomeone has wronged you, forget it and forgive! We have no right topunish. And then you will know the happiness of forgiving.""If I were a woman I would do so, Mary. That is a woman's virtue. But aman should not and cannot forgive and forget," he replied, and thoughtill that moment he had not been thinking of Kuragin, all his unexpendedanger suddenly swelled up in his heart."If Mary is already persuading me to forgive, it means that I ought longago to have punished him," he thought. And giving her no further reply,he began thinking of the glad vindictive moment when he would meetKuragin who he knew was now in the army.Princess Mary begged him to stay one day more, saying that she knew howunhappy her father would be if Andrew left without being reconciled tohim, but Prince Andrew replied that he would probably soon be back againfrom the army and would certainly write to his father, but that thelonger he stayed now the more embittered their differences would become."Good-bye, Andrew! Remember that misfortunes come from God, and men arenever to blame," were the last words he heard from his sister when hetook leave of her."Then it must be so!" thought Prince Andrew as he drove out of theavenue from the house at Bald Hills. "She, poor innocent creature, isleft to be victimized by an old man who has outlived his wits. The oldman feels he is guilty, but cannot change himself. My boy is growing upand rejoices in life, in which like everybody else he will deceive or bedeceived. And I am off to the army. Why? I myself don't know. I want tomeet that man whom I despise, so as to give him a chance to kill andlaugh at me!"These conditions of life had been the same before, but then they wereall connected, while now they had all tumbled to pieces. Only senselessthings, lacking coherence, presented themselves one after another toPrince Andrew's mind.CHAPTER IXPrince Andrew reached the general headquarters of the army at the end ofJune. The first army, with which was the Emperor, occupied the fortifiedcamp at Drissa; the second army was retreating, trying to effect ajunction with the first one from which it was said to be cut off bylarge French forces. Everyone was dissatisfied with the general courseof affairs in the Russian army, but no one anticipated any danger ofinvasion of the Russian provinces, and no one thought the war wouldextend farther than the western, the Polish, provinces.Prince Andrew found Barclay de Tolly, to whom he had been assigned, onthe bank of the Drissa. As there was not a single town or large villagein the vicinity of the camp, the immense number of generals andcourtiers accompanying the army were living in the best houses of thevillages on both sides of the river, over a radius of six miles. Barclayde Tolly was quartered nearly three miles from the Emperor. He receivedBolkonski stiffly and coldly and told him in his foreign accent that hewould mention him to the Emperor for a decision as to his employment,but asked him meanwhile to remain on his staff. Anatole Kuragin, whomPrince Andrew had hoped to find with the army, was not there. He hadgone to Petersburg, but Prince Andrew was glad to hear this. His mindwas occupied by the interests of the center that was conducting agigantic war, and he was glad to be free for a while from thedistraction caused by the thought of Kuragin. During the first fourdays, while no duties were required of him, Prince Andrew rode round thewhole fortified camp and, by the aid of his own knowledge and by talkswith experts, tried to form a definite opinion about it. But thequestion whether the camp was advantageous or disadvantageous remainedfor him undecided. Already from his military experience and what he hadseen in the Austrian campaign, he had come to the conclusion that in warthe most deeply considered plans have no significance and that alldepends on the way unexpected movements of the enemy--that cannot beforeseen--are met, and on how and by whom the whole matter is handled.To clear up this last point for himself, Prince Andrew, utilizing hisposition and acquaintances, tried to fathom the character of the controlof the army and of the men and parties engaged in it, and he deduced forhimself the following of the state of affairs.While the Emperor had still been at Vilna, the forces had been dividedinto three armies. First, the army under Barclay de Tolly, secondly, thearmy under Bagration, and thirdly, the one commanded by Tormasov. TheEmperor was with the first army, but not as commander-in-chief. In theorders issued it was stated, not that the Emperor would take command,but only that he would be with the army. The Emperor, moreover, had withhim not a commander-in-chief's staff but the imperial headquartersstaff. In attendance on him was the head of the imperial staff,Quartermaster General Prince Volkonski, as well as generals, imperialaides-de-camp, diplomatic officials, and a large number of foreigners,but not the army staff. Besides these, there were in attendance on theEmperor without any definite appointments: Arakcheev, the ex-Minister ofWar; Count Bennigsen, the senior general in rank; the Grand DukeTsarevich Constantine Pavlovich; Count Rumyantsev, the Chancellor;Stein, a former Prussian minister; Armfeldt, a Swedish general; Pfuel,the chief author of the plan of campaign; Paulucci, an adjutant generaland Sardinian emigre; Wolzogen--and many others. Though these men had nomilitary appointment in the army, their position gave them influence,and often a corps commander, or even the commander-in-chief, did notknow in what capacity he was questioned by Bennigsen, the Grand Duke,Arakcheev, or Prince Volkonski, or was given this or that advice and didnot know whether a certain order received in the form of advice emanatedfrom the man who gave it or from the Emperor and whether it had to beexecuted or not. But this was only the external condition; the essentialsignificance of the presence of the Emperor and of all these people,from a courtier's point of view (and in an Emperor's vicinity all becamecourtiers), was clear to everyone. It was this: the Emperor did notassume the title of commander-in-chief, but disposed of all the armies;the men around him were his assistants. Arakcheev was a faithfulcustodian to enforce order and acted as the sovereign's bodyguard.Bennigsen was a landlord in the Vilna province who appeared to be doingthe honors of the district, but was in reality a good general, useful asan adviser and ready at hand to replace Barclay. The Grand Duke wasthere because it suited him to be. The ex-Minister Stein was therebecause his advice was useful and the Emperor Alexander held him in highesteem personally. Armfeldt virulently hated Napoleon and was a generalfull of self-confidence, a quality that always influenced Alexander.Paulucci was there because he was bold and decided in speech. Theadjutants general were there because they always accompanied theEmperor, and lastly and chiefly Pfuel was there because he had drawn upthe plan of campaign against Napoleon and, having induced Alexander tobelieve in the efficacy of that plan, was directing the whole businessof the war. With Pfuel was Wolzogen, who expressed Pfuel's thoughts in amore comprehensible way than Pfuel himself (who was a harsh, bookishtheorist, self-confident to the point of despising everyone else) wasable to do.Besides these Russians and foreigners who propounded new and unexpectedideas every day--especially the foreigners, who did so with a boldnesscharacteristic of people employed in a country not their own--there weremany secondary personages accompanying the army because their principalswere there.Among the opinions and voices in this immense, restless, brilliant, andproud sphere, Prince Andrew noticed the following sharply definedsubdivisions of tendencies and parties:The first party consisted of Pfuel and his adherents--military theoristswho believed in a science of war with immutable laws--laws of obliquemovements, outflankings, and so forth. Pfuel and his adherents demandeda retirement into the depths of the country in accordance with preciselaws defined by a pseudo-theory of war, and they saw only barbarism,ignorance, or evil intention in every deviation from that theory. Tothis party belonged the foreign nobles, Wolzogen, Wintzingerode, andothers, chiefly Germans.The second party was directly opposed to the first; one extreme, asalways happens, was met by representatives of the other. The members ofthis party were those who had demanded an advance from Vilna into Polandand freedom from all prearranged plans. Besides being advocates of boldaction, this section also represented nationalism, which made them stillmore one-sided in the dispute. They were Russians: Bagration, Ermolov(who was beginning to come to the front), and others. At that time afamous joke of Ermolov's was being circulated, that as a great favor hehad petitioned the Emperor to make him a German. The men of that party,remembering Suvorov, said that what one had to do was not to reason, orstick pins into maps, but to fight, beat the enemy, keep him out ofRussia, and not let the army get discouraged.To the third party--in which the Emperor had most confidence--belongedthe courtiers who tried to arrange compromises between the other two.The members of this party, chiefly civilians and to whom Arakcheevbelonged, thought and said what men who have no convictions but wish toseem to have some generally say. They said that undoubtedly war,particularly against such a genius as Bonaparte (they called himBonaparte now), needs most deeply devised plans and profound scientificknowledge and in that respect Pfuel was a genius, but at the same timeit had to be acknowledged that the theorists are often one-sided, andtherefore one should not trust them absolutely, but should also listento what Pfuel's opponents and practical men of experience in warfare hadto say, and then choose a middle course. They insisted on the retentionof the camp at Drissa, according to Pfuel's plan, but on changing themovements of the other armies. Though, by this course, neither one aimnor the other could be attained, yet it seemed best to the adherents ofthis third party.Of a fourth opinion the most conspicuous representative was theTsarevich, who could not forget his disillusionment at Austerlitz, wherehe had ridden out at the head of the Guards, in his casque and cavalryuniform as to a review, expecting to crush the French gallantly; butunexpectedly finding himself in the front line had narrowly escaped amidthe general confusion. The men of this party had both the quality andthe defect of frankness in their opinions. They feared Napoleon,recognized his strength and their own weakness, and frankly said so.They said: "Nothing but sorrow, shame, and ruin will come of all this!We have abandoned Vilna and Vitebsk and shall abandon Drissa. The onlyreasonable thing left to do is to conclude peace as soon as possible,before we are turned out of Petersburg."This view was very general in the upper army circles and found supportalso in Petersburg and from the chancellor, Rumyantsev, who, for otherreasons of state, was in favor of peace.The fifth party consisted of those who were adherents of Barclay deTolly, not so much as a man but as minister of war and commander-in-chief. "Be he what he may" (they always began like that), "he is anhonest, practical man and we have nobody better. Give him real power,for war cannot be conducted successfully without unity of command, andhe will show what he can do, as he did in Finland. If our army is wellorganized and strong and has withdrawn to Drissa without suffering anydefeats, we owe this entirely to Barclay. If Barclay is now to besuperseded by Bennigsen all will be lost, for Bennigsen showed hisincapacity already in 1807."The sixth party, the Bennigsenites, said, on the contrary, that at anyrate there was no one more active and experienced than Bennigsen: "andtwist about as you may, you will have to come to Bennigsen eventually.Let the others make mistakes now!" said they, arguing that ourretirement to Drissa was a most shameful reverse and an unbroken seriesof blunders. "The more mistakes that are made the better. It will at anyrate be understood all the sooner that things cannot go on like this.What is wanted is not some Barclay or other, but a man like Bennigsen,who made his mark in 1807, and to whom Napoleon himself did justice--aman whose authority would be willingly recognized, and Bennigsen is theonly such man."The seventh party consisted of the sort of people who are always to befound, especially around young sovereigns, and of whom there wereparticularly many round Alexander--generals and imperial aides-de-camppassionately devoted to the Emperor, not merely as a monarch but as aman, adoring him sincerely and disinterestedly, as Rostov had done in1805, and who saw in him not only all the virtues but all humancapabilities as well. These men, though enchanted with the sovereign forrefusing the command of the army, yet blamed him for such excessivemodesty, and only desired and insisted that their adored sovereignshould abandon his diffidence and openly announce that he would placehimself at the head of the army, gather round him a commander-in-chief'sstaff, and, consulting experienced theoreticians and practical men wherenecessary, would himself lead the troops, whose spirits would thereby beraised to the highest pitch.The eighth and largest group, which in its enormous numbers was to theothers as ninety-nine to one, consisted of men who desired neither peacenor war, neither an advance nor a defensive camp at the Drissa oranywhere else, neither Barclay nor the Emperor, neither Pfuel norBennigsen, but only the one most essential thing--as much advantage andpleasure for themselves as possible. In the troubled waters ofconflicting and intersecting intrigues that eddied about the Emperor'sheadquarters, it was possible to succeed in many ways unthinkable atother times. A man who simply wished to retain his lucrative post wouldtoday agree with Pfuel, tomorrow with his opponent, and the day after,merely to avoid responsibility or to please the Emperor, would declarethat he had no opinion at all on the matter. Another who wished to gainsome advantage would attract the Emperor's attention by loudlyadvocating the very thing the Emperor had hinted at the day before, andwould dispute and shout at the council, beating his breast andchallenging those who did not agree with him to duels, thereby provingthat he was prepared to sacrifice himself for the common good. A third,in the absence of opponents, between two councils would simply solicit aspecial gratuity for his faithful services, well knowing that at thatmoment people would be too busy to refuse him. A fourth while seeminglyoverwhelmed with work would often come accidentally under the Emperor'seye. A fifth, to achieve his long-cherished aim of dining with theEmperor, would stubbornly insist on the correctness or falsity of somenewly emerging opinion and for this object would produce arguments moreor less forcible and correct.All the men of this party were fishing for rubles, decorations, andpromotions, and in this pursuit watched only the weathercock of imperialfavor, and directly they noticed it turning in any direction, this wholedrone population of the army began blowing hard that way, so that it wasall the harder for the Emperor to turn it elsewhere. Amid theuncertainties of the position, with the menace of serious danger givinga peculiarly threatening character to everything, amid this vortex ofintrigue, egotism, conflict of views and feelings, and the diversity ofrace among these people--this eighth and largest party of thosepreoccupied with personal interests imparted great confusion andobscurity to the common task. Whatever question arose, a swarm of thesedrones, without having finished their buzzing on a previous theme, flewover to the new one and by their hum drowned and obscured the voices ofthose who were disputing honestly.From among all these parties, just at the time Prince Andrew reached thearmy, another, a ninth party, was being formed and was beginning toraise its voice. This was the party of the elders, reasonable menexperienced and capable in state affairs, who, without sharing any ofthose conflicting opinions, were able to take a detached view of whatwas going on at the staff at headquarters and to consider means ofescape from this muddle, indecision, intricacy, and weakness.The men of this party said and thought that what was wrong resultedchiefly from the Emperor's presence in the army with his military courtand from the consequent presence there of an indefinite, conditional,and unsteady fluctuation of relations, which is in place at court butharmful in an army; that a sovereign should reign but not command thearmy, and that the only way out of the position would be for the Emperorand his court to leave the army; that the mere presence of the Emperorparalyzed the action of fifty thousand men required to secure hispersonal safety, and that the worst commander-in-chief, if independent,would be better than the very best one trammeled by the presence andauthority of the monarch.Just at the time Prince Andrew was living unoccupied at Drissa,Shishkov, the Secretary of State and one of the chief representatives ofthis party, wrote a letter to the Emperor which Arakcheev and Balashevagreed to sign. In this letter, availing himself of permission given himby the Emperor to discuss the general course of affairs, he respectfullysuggested--on the plea that it was necessary for the sovereign to arousea warlike spirit in the people of the capital--that the Emperor shouldleave the army.That arousing of the people by their sovereign and his call to them todefend their country--the very incitement which was the chief cause ofRussia's triumph in so far as it was produced by the Tsar's personalpresence in Moscow--was suggested to the Emperor, and accepted by him,as a pretext for quitting the army.CHAPTER XThis letter had not yet been presented to the Emperor when Barclay, oneday at dinner, informed Bolkonski that the sovereign wished to see himpersonally, to question him about Turkey, and that Prince Andrew was topresent himself at Bennigsen's quarters at six that evening.News was received at the Emperor's quarters that very day of a freshmovement by Napoleon which might endanger the army--news subsequentlyfound to be false. And that morning Colonel Michaud had ridden round theDrissa fortifications with the Emperor and had pointed out to him thatthis fortified camp constructed by Pfuel, and till then considered achef-d'oeuvre of tactical science which would ensure Napoleon'sdestruction, was an absurdity, threatening the destruction of theRussian army.Prince Andrew arrived at Bennigsen's quarters--a country gentleman'shouse of moderate size, situated on the very banks of the river. NeitherBennigsen nor the Emperor was there, but Chernyshev, the Emperor's aide-de-camp, received Bolkonski and informed him that the Emperor,accompanied by General Bennigsen and Marquis Paulucci, had gone a secondtime that day to inspect the fortifications of the Drissa camp, of thesuitability of which serious doubts were beginning to be felt.Chernyshev was sitting at a window in the first room with a French novelin his hand. This room had probably been a music room; there was stillan organ in it on which some rugs were piled, and in one corner stoodthe folding bedstead of Bennigsen's adjutant. This adjutant was alsothere and sat dozing on the rolled-up bedding, evidently exhausted bywork or by feasting. Two doors led from the room, one straight on intowhat had been the drawing room, and another, on the right, to the study.Through the first door came the sound of voices conversing in German andoccasionally in French. In that drawing room were gathered, by theEmperor's wish, not a military council (the Emperor preferredindefiniteness), but certain persons whose opinions he wished to know inview of the impending difficulties. It was not a council of war, but, asit were, a council to elucidate certain questions for the Emperorpersonally. To this semicouncil had been invited the Swedish GeneralArmfeldt, Adjutant General Wolzogen, Wintzingerode (whom Napoleon hadreferred to as a renegade French subject), Michaud, Toll, Count Steinwho was not a military man at all, and Pfuel himself, who, as PrinceAndrew had heard, was the mainspring of the whole affair. Prince Andrewhad an opportunity of getting a good look at him, for Pfuel arrived soonafter himself and, in passing through to the drawing room, stopped aminute to speak to Chernyshev.At first sight, Pfuel, in his ill-made uniform of a Russian general,which fitted him badly like a fancy costume, seemed familiar to PrinceAndrew, though he saw him now for the first time. There was about himsomething of Weyrother, Mack, and Schmidt, and many other Germantheorist-generals whom Prince Andrew had seen in 1805, but he was moretypical than any of them. Prince Andrew had never yet seen a Germantheorist in whom all the characteristics of those others were united tosuch an extent.Pfuel was short and very thin but broad-boned, of coarse, robust build,broad in the hips, and with prominent shoulder blades. His face was muchwrinkled and his eyes deep set. His hair had evidently been hastilybrushed smooth in front of the temples, but stuck up behind in quaintlittle tufts. He entered the room, looking restlessly and angrilyaround, as if afraid of everything in that large apartment. Awkwardlyholding up his sword, he addressed Chernyshev and asked in German wherethe Emperor was. One could see that he wished to pass through the roomsas quickly as possible, finish with the bows and greetings, and sit downto business in front of a map, where he would feel at home. He noddedhurriedly in reply to Chernyshev, and smiled ironically on hearing thatthe sovereign was inspecting the fortifications that he, Pfuel, hadplanned in accord with his theory. He muttered something to himselfabruptly and in a bass voice, as self-assured Germans do--it might havebeen "stupid fellow"... or "the whole affair will be ruined," or"something absurd will come of it."... Prince Andrew did not catch whathe said and would have passed on, but Chernyshev introduced him toPfuel, remarking that Prince Andrew was just back from Turkey where thewar had terminated so fortunately. Pfuel barely glanced--not so much atPrince Andrew as past him--and said, with a laugh: "That must have beena fine tactical war"; and, laughing contemptuously, went on into theroom from which the sound of voices was heard.Pfuel, always inclined to be irritably sarcastic, was particularlydisturbed that day, evidently by the fact that they had dared to inspectand criticize his camp in his absence. From this short interview withPfuel, Prince Andrew, thanks to his Austerlitz experiences, was able toform a clear conception of the man. Pfuel was one of those hopelesslyand immutably self-confident men, self-confident to the point ofmartyrdom as only Germans are, because only Germans are self-confidenton the basis of an abstract notion--science, that is, the supposedknowledge of absolute truth. A Frenchman is self-assured because heregards himself personally, both in mind and body, as irresistiblyattractive to men and women. An Englishman is self-assured, as being acitizen of the best-organized state in the world, and therefore as anEnglishman always knows what he should do and knows that all he does asan Englishman is undoubtedly correct. An Italian is self-assured becausehe is excitable and easily forgets himself and other people. A Russianis self-assured just because he knows nothing and does not want to knowanything, since he does not believe that anything can be known. TheGerman's self-assurance is worst of all, stronger and more repulsivethan any other, because he imagines that he knows the truth--science--which he himself has invented but which is for him the absolute truth.Pfuel was evidently of that sort. He had a science--the theory ofoblique movements deduced by him from the history of Frederick theGreat's wars, and all he came across in the history of more recentwarfare seemed to him absurd and barbarous--monstrous collisions inwhich so many blunders were committed by both sides that these warscould not be called wars, they did not accord with the theory, andtherefore could not serve as material for science.In 1806 Pfuel had been one of those responsible, for the plan ofcampaign that ended in Jena and Auerstadt, but he did not see the leastproof of the fallibility of his theory in the disasters of that war. Onthe contrary, the deviations made from his theory were, in his opinion,the sole cause of the whole disaster, and with characteristicallygleeful sarcasm he would remark, "There, I said the whole affair wouldgo to the devil!" Pfuel was one of those theoreticians who so love theirtheory that they lose sight of the theory's object--its practicalapplication. His love of theory made him hate everything practical, andhe would not listen to it. He was even pleased by failures, for failuresresulting from deviations in practice from the theory only proved to himthe accuracy of his theory.He said a few words to Prince Andrew and Chernyshev about the presentwar, with the air of a man who knows beforehand that all will go wrong,and who is not displeased that it should be so. The unbrushed tufts ofhair sticking up behind and the hastily brushed hair on his templesexpressed this most eloquently.He passed into the next room, and the deep, querulous sounds of hisvoice were at once heard from there.CHAPTER XIPrince Andrew's eyes were still following Pfuel out of the room whenCount Bennigsen entered hurriedly, and nodding to Bolkonski, but notpausing, went into the study, giving instructions to his adjutant as hewent. The Emperor was following him, and Bennigsen had hastened on tomake some preparations and to be ready to receive the sovereign.Chernyshev and Prince Andrew went out into the porch, where the Emperor,who looked fatigued, was dismounting. Marquis Paulucci was talking tohim with particular warmth and the Emperor, with his head bent to theleft, was listening with a dissatisfied air. The Emperor moved forwardevidently wishing to end the conversation, but the flushed and excitedItalian, oblivious of decorum, followed him and continued to speak."And as for the man who advised forming this camp--the Drissa camp,"said Paulucci, as the Emperor mounted the steps and noticing PrinceAndrew scanned his unfamiliar face, "as to that person, sire..."continued Paulucci, desperately, apparently unable to restrain himself,"the man who advised the Drissa camp--I see no alternative but thelunatic asylum or the gallows!"Without heeding the end of the Italian's remarks, and as though nothearing them, the Emperor, recognizing Bolkonski, addressed himgraciously."I am very glad to see you! Go in there where they are meeting, and waitfor me."The Emperor went into the study. He was followed by Prince PeterMikhaylovich Volkonski and Baron Stein, and the door closed behind them.Prince Andrew, taking advantage of the Emperor's permission, accompaniedPaulucci, whom he had known in Turkey, into the drawing room where thecouncil was assembled.Prince Peter Mikhaylovich Volkonski occupied the position, as it were,of chief of the Emperor's staff. He came out of the study into thedrawing room with some maps which he spread on a table, and putquestions on which he wished to hear the opinion of the gentlemenpresent. What had happened was that news (which afterwards proved to befalse) had been received during the night of a movement by the French tooutflank the Drissa camp.The first to speak was General Armfeldt who, to meet the difficulty thatpresented itself, unexpectedly proposed a perfectly new position awayfrom the Petersburg and Moscow roads. The reason for this wasinexplicable (unless he wished to show that he, too, could have anopinion), but he urged that at this point the army should unite andthere await the enemy. It was plain that Armfeldt had thought out thatplan long ago and now expounded it not so much to answer the questionsput--which, in fact, his plan did not answer--as to avail himself of theopportunity to air it. It was one of the millions of proposals, one asgood as another, that could be made as long as it was quite unknown whatcharacter the war would take. Some disputed his arguments, othersdefended them. Young Count Toll objected to the Swedish general's viewsmore warmly than anyone else, and in the course of the dispute drew fromhis side pocket a well-filled notebook, which he asked permission toread to them. In these voluminous notes Toll suggested another scheme,totally different from Armfeldt's or Pfuel's plan of campaign. In answerto Toll, Paulucci suggested an advance and an attack, which, he urged,could alone extricate us from the present uncertainty and from the trap(as he called the Drissa camp) in which we were situated.During all these discussions Pfuel and his interpreter, Wolzogen (his"bridge" in court relations), were silent. Pfuel only snortedcontemptuously and turned away, to show that he would never demeanhimself by replying to such nonsense as he was now hearing. So whenPrince Volkonski, who was in the chair, called on him to give hisopinion, he merely said:"Why ask me? General Armfeldt has proposed a splendid position with anexposed rear, or why not this Italian gentleman's attack--very fine, ora retreat, also good! Why ask me?" said he. "Why, you yourselves knoweverything better than I do."But when Volkonski said, with a frown, that it was in the Emperor's namethat he asked his opinion, Pfuel rose and, suddenly growing animated,began to speak:"Everything has been spoiled, everything muddled, everybody thought theyknew better than I did, and now you come to me! How mend matters? Thereis nothing to mend! The principles laid down by me must be strictlyadhered to," said he, drumming on the table with his bony fingers. "Whatis the difficulty? Nonsense, childishness!"He went up to the map and speaking rapidly began proving that noeventuality could alter the efficiency of the Drissa camp, thateverything had been foreseen, and that if the enemy were really going tooutflank it, the enemy would inevitably be destroyed.Paulucci, who did not know German, began questioning him in French.Wolzogen came to the assistance of his chief, who spoke French badly,and began translating for him, hardly able to keep pace with Pfuel, whowas rapidly demonstrating that not only all that had happened, but allthat could happen, had been foreseen in his scheme, and that if therewere now any difficulties the whole fault lay in the fact that his planhad not been precisely executed. He kept laughing sarcastically, hedemonstrated, and at last contemptuously ceased to demonstrate, like amathematician who ceases to prove in various ways the accuracy of aproblem that has already been proved. Wolzogen took his place andcontinued to explain his views in French, every now and then turning toPfuel and saying, "Is it not so, your excellency?" But Pfuel, like a manheated in a fight who strikes those on his own side, shouted angrily athis own supporter, Wolzogen:"Well, of course, what more is there to explain?"Paulucci and Michaud both attacked Wolzogen simultaneously in French.Armfeldt addressed Pfuel in German. Toll explained to Volkonski inRussian. Prince Andrew listened and observed in silence.Of all these men Prince Andrew sympathized most with Pfuel, angry,determined, and absurdly self-confident as he was. Of all those present,evidently he alone was not seeking anything for himself, nursed nohatred against anyone, and only desired that the plan, formed on atheory arrived at by years of toil, should be carried out. He wasridiculous, and unpleasantly sarcastic, but yet he inspired involuntaryrespect by his boundless devotion to an idea. Besides this, the remarksof all except Pfuel had one common trait that had not been noticeable atthe council of war in 1805: there was now a panic fear of Napoleon'sgenius, which, though concealed, was noticeable in every rejoinder.Everything was assumed to be possible for Napoleon, they expected himfrom every side, and invoked his terrible name to shatter each other'sproposals. Pfuel alone seemed to consider Napoleon a barbarian likeeveryone else who opposed his theory. But besides this feeling ofrespect, Pfuel evoked pity in Prince Andrew. From the tone in which thecourtiers addressed him and the way Paulucci had allowed himself tospeak of him to the Emperor, but above all from a certain desperation inPfuel's own expressions, it was clear that the others knew, and Pfuelhimself felt, that his fall was at hand. And despite his self-confidenceand grumpy German sarcasm he was pitiable, with his hair smoothlybrushed on the temples and sticking up in tufts behind. Though heconcealed the fact under a show of irritation and contempt, he wasevidently in despair that the sole remaining chance of verifying histheory by a huge experiment and proving its soundness to the whole worldwas slipping away from him.The discussions continued a long time, and the longer they lasted themore heated became the disputes, culminating in shouts andpersonalities, and the less was it possible to arrive at any generalconclusion from all that had been said. Prince Andrew, listening to thispolyglot talk and to these surmises, plans, refutations, and shouts,felt nothing but amazement at what they were saying. A thought that hadlong since and often occurred to him during his military activities--theidea that there is not and cannot be any science of war, and thattherefore there can be no such thing as a military genius--now appearedto him an obvious truth. "What theory and science is possible about amatter the conditions and circumstances of which are unknown and cannotbe defined, especially when the strength of the acting forces cannot beascertained? No one was or is able to foresee in what condition our orthe enemy's armies will be in a day's time, and no one can gauge theforce of this or that detachment. Sometimes--when there is not a cowardat the front to shout, 'We are cut off!' and start running, but a braveand jolly lad who shouts, 'Hurrah!'--a detachment of five thousand isworth thirty thousand, as at Schon Grabern, while at times fiftythousand run from eight thousand, as at Austerlitz. What science canthere be in a matter in which, as in all practical matters, nothing canbe defined and everything depends on innumerable conditions, thesignificance of which is determined at a particular moment which arrivesno one knows when? Armfeldt says our army is cut in half, and Pauluccisays we have got the French army between two fires; Michaud says thatthe worthlessness of the Drissa camp lies in having the river behind it,and Pfuel says that is what constitutes its strength; Toll proposes oneplan, Armfeldt another, and they are all good and all bad, and theadvantages of any suggestions can be seen only at the moment of trial.And why do they all speak of a 'military genius'? Is a man a genius whocan order bread to be brought up at the right time and say who is to goto the right and who to the left? It is only because military men areinvested with pomp and power and crowds of sychophants flatter power,attributing to it qualities of genius it does not possess. The bestgenerals I have known were, on the contrary, stupid or absent-mindedmen. Bagration was the best, Napoleon himself admitted that. And ofBonaparte himself! I remember his limited, self-satisfied face on thefield of Austerlitz. Not only does a good army commander not need anyspecial qualities, on the contrary he needs the absence of the highestand best human attributes--love, poetry, tenderness, and philosophicinquiring doubt. He should be limited, firmly convinced that what he isdoing is very important (otherwise he will not have sufficientpatience), and only then will he be a brave leader. God forbid that heshould be humane, should love, or pity, or think of what is just andunjust. It is understandable that a theory of their 'genius' wasinvented for them long ago because they have power! The success of amilitary action depends not on them, but on the man in the ranks whoshouts, 'We are lost!' or who shouts, 'Hurrah!' And only in the rankscan one serve with assurance of being useful."So thought Prince Andrew as he listened to the talking, and he rousedhimself only when Paulucci called him and everyone was leaving.At the review next day the Emperor asked Prince Andrew where he wouldlike to serve, and Prince Andrew lost his standing in court circlesforever by not asking to remain attached to the sovereign's person, butfor permission to serve in the army.CHAPTER XIIBefore the beginning of the campaign, Rostov had received a letter fromhis parents in which they told him briefly of Natasha's illness and thebreaking off of her engagement to Prince Andrew (which they explained byNatasha's having rejected him) and again asked Nicholas to retire fromthe army and return home. On receiving this letter, Nicholas did noteven make any attempt to get leave of absence or to retire from thearmy, but wrote to his parents that he was sorry Natasha was ill and herengagement broken off, and that he would do all he could to meet theirwishes. To Sonya he wrote separately."Adored friend of my soul!" he wrote. "Nothing but honor could keep mefrom returning to the country. But now, at the commencement of thecampaign, I should feel dishonored, not only in my comrades' eyes but inmy own, if I preferred my own happiness to my love and duty to theFatherland. But this shall be our last separation. Believe me, directlythe war is over, if I am still alive and still loved by you, I willthrow up everything and fly to you, to press you forever to my ardentbreast."It was, in fact, only the commencement of the campaign that preventedRostov from returning home as he had promised and marrying Sonya. Theautumn in Otradnoe with the hunting, and the winter with the Christmasholidays and Sonya's love, had opened out to him a vista of tranquilrural joys and peace such as he had never known before, and which nowallured him. "A splendid wife, children, a good pack of hounds, a dozenleashes of smart borzois, agriculture, neighbors, service byelection..." thought he. But now the campaign was beginning, and he hadto remain with his regiment. And since it had to be so, Nicholas Rostov,as was natural to him, felt contented with the life he led in theregiment and was able to find pleasure in that life.On his return from his furlough Nicholas, having been joyfully welcomedby his comrades, was sent to obtain remounts and brought back from theUkraine excellent horses which pleased him and earned him commendationfrom his commanders. During his absence he had been promoted captain,and when the regiment was put on war footing with an increase innumbers, he was again allotted his old squadron.The campaign began, the regiment was moved into Poland on double pay,new officers arrived, new men and horses, and above all everybody wasinfected with the merrily excited mood that goes with the commencementof a war, and Rostov, conscious of his advantageous position in theregiment, devoted himself entirely to the pleasures and interests ofmilitary service, though he knew that sooner or later he would have torelinquish them.The troops retired from Vilna for various complicated reasons of state,political and strategic. Each step of the retreat was accompanied by acomplicated interplay of interests, arguments, and passions atheadquarters. For the Pavlograd hussars, however, the whole of thisretreat during the finest period of summer and with sufficient supplieswas a very simple and agreeable business.It was only at headquarters that there was depression, uneasiness, andintriguing; in the body of the army they did not ask themselves wherethey were going or why. If they regretted having to retreat, it was onlybecause they had to leave billets they had grown accustomed to, or somepretty young Polish lady. If the thought that things looked bad chancedto enter anyone's head, he tried to be as cheerful as befits a goodsoldier and not to think of the general trend of affairs, but only ofthe task nearest to hand. First they camped gaily before Vilna, makingacquaintance with the Polish landowners, preparing for reviews and beingreviewed by the Emperor and other high commanders. Then came an order toretreat to Sventsyani and destroy any provisions they could not carryaway with them. Sventsyani was remembered by the hussars only as thedrunken camp, a name the whole army gave to their encampment there, andbecause many complaints were made against the troops, who, takingadvantage of the order to collect provisions, took also horses,carriages, and carpets from the Polish proprietors. Rostov rememberedSventsyani, because on the first day of their arrival at that small townhe changed his sergeant major and was unable to manage all the drunkenmen of his squadron who, unknown to him, had appropriated five barrelsof old beer. From Sventsyani they retired farther and farther to Drissa,and thence again beyond Drissa, drawing near to the frontier of Russiaproper.On the thirteenth of July the Pavlograds took part in a serious actionfor the first time.On the twelfth of July, on the eve of that action, there was a heavystorm of rain and hail. In general, the summer of 1812 was remarkablefor its storms.The two Pavlograd squadrons were bivouacking on a field of rye, whichwas already in ear but had been completely trodden down by cattle andhorses. The rain was descending in torrents, and Rostov, with a youngofficer named Ilyin, his protege, was sitting in a hastily constructedshelter. An officer of their regiment, with long mustaches extendingonto his cheeks, who after riding to the staff had been overtaken by therain, entered Rostov's shelter."I have come from the staff, Count. Have you heard of Raevski'sexploit?"And the officer gave them details of the Saltanov battle, which he hadheard at the staff.Rostov, smoking his pipe and turning his head about as the watertrickled down his neck, listened inattentively, with an occasionalglance at Ilyin, who was pressing close to him. This officer, a lad ofsixteen who had recently joined the regiment, was now in the samerelation to Nicholas that Nicholas had been to Denisov seven yearsbefore. Ilyin tried to imitate Rostov in everything and adored him as agirl might have done.Zdrzhinski, the officer with the long mustache, spoke grandiloquently ofthe Saltanov dam being "a Russian Thermopylae," and of how a deed worthyof antiquity had been performed by General Raevski. He recounted howRaevski had led his two sons onto the dam under terrific fire and hadcharged with them beside him. Rostov heard the story and not only saidnothing to encourage Zdrzhinski's enthusiasm but, on the contrary,looked like a man ashamed of what he was hearing, though with nointention of contradicting it. Since the campaigns of Austerlitz and of1807 Rostov knew by experience that men always lie when describingmilitary exploits, as he himself had done when recounting them; besidesthat, he had experience enough to know that nothing happens in war atall as we can imagine or relate it. And so he did not like Zdrzhinski'stale, nor did he like Zdrzhinski himself who, with his mustachesextending over his cheeks, bent low over the face of his hearer, as washis habit, and crowded Rostov in the narrow shanty. Rostov looked at himin silence. "In the first place, there must have been such a confusionand crowding on the dam that was being attacked that if Raevski did leadhis sons there, it could have had no effect except perhaps on some dozenmen nearest to him," thought he, "the rest could not have seen how orwith whom Raevski came onto the dam. And even those who did see it wouldnot have been much stimulated by it, for what had they to do withRaevski's tender paternal feelings when their own skins were in danger?And besides, the fate of the Fatherland did not depend on whether theytook the Saltanov dam or not, as we are told was the case atThermopylae. So why should he have made such a sacrifice? And why exposehis own children in the battle? I would not have taken my brother Petyathere, or even Ilyin, who's a stranger to me but a nice lad, but wouldhave tried to put them somewhere under cover," Nicholas continued tothink, as he listened to Zdrzhinski. But he did not express histhoughts, for in such matters, too, he had gained experience. He knewthat this tale redounded to the glory of our arms and so one had topretend not to doubt it. And he acted accordingly."I can't stand this any more," said Ilyin, noticing that Rostov did notrelish Zdrzhinski's conversation. "My stockings and shirt... and thewater is running on my seat! I'll go and look for shelter. The rainseems less heavy."Ilyin went out and Zdrzhinski rode away.Five minutes later Ilyin, splashing through the mud, came running backto the shanty."Hurrah! Rostov, come quick! I've found it! About two hundred yards awaythere's a tavern where ours have already gathered. We can at least getdry there, and Mary Hendrikhovna's there."Mary Hendrikhovna was the wife of the regimental doctor, a pretty youngGerman woman he had married in Poland. The doctor, whether from lack ofmeans or because he did not like to part from his young wife in theearly days of their marriage, took her about with him wherever thehussar regiment went and his jealousy had become a standing joke amongthe hussar officers.Rostov threw his cloak over his shoulders, shouted to Lavrushka tofollow with the things, and--now slipping in the mud, now splashingright through it--set off with Ilyin in the lessening rain and thedarkness that was occasionally rent by distant lightning."Rostov, where are you?""Here. What lightning!" they called to one another.CHAPTER XIIIIn the tavern, before which stood the doctor's covered cart, there werealready some five officers. Mary Hendrikhovna, a plump little blondeGerman, in a dressing jacket and nightcap, was sitting on a broad benchin the front corner. Her husband, the doctor, lay asleep behind her.Rostov and Ilyin, on entering the room, were welcomed with merry shoutsand laughter."Dear me, how jolly we are!" said Rostov laughing."And why do you stand there gaping?""What swells they are! Why, the water streams from them! Don't make ourdrawing room so wet.""Don't mess Mary Hendrikhovna's dress!" cried other voices.Rostov and Ilyin hastened to find a corner where they could change intodry clothes without offending Mary Hendrikhovna's modesty. They weregoing into a tiny recess behind a partition to change, but found itcompletely filled by three officers who sat playing cards by the lightof a solitary candle on an empty box, and these officers would on noaccount yield their position. Mary Hendrikhovna obliged them with theloan of a petticoat to be used as a curtain, and behind that screenRostov and Ilyin, helped by Lavrushka who had brought their kits,changed their wet things for dry ones.A fire was made up in the dilapidated brick stove. A board was found,fixed on two saddles and covered with a horsecloth, a small samovar wasproduced and a cellaret and half a bottle of rum, and having asked MaryHendrikhovna to preside, they all crowded round her. One offered her aclean handkerchief to wipe her charming hands, another spread a jacketunder her little feet to keep them from the damp, another hung his coatover the window to keep out the draft, and yet another waved the fliesoff her husband's face, lest he should wake up."Leave him alone," said Mary Hendrikhovna, smiling timidly and happily."He is sleeping well as it is, after a sleepless night.""Oh, no, Mary Hendrikhovna," replied the officer, "one must look afterthe doctor. Perhaps he'll take pity on me someday, when it comes tocutting off a leg or an arm for me."There were only three tumblers, the water was so muddy that one couldnot make out whether the tea was strong or weak, and the samovar heldonly six tumblers of water, but this made it all the pleasanter to taketurns in order of seniority to receive one's tumbler from MaryHendrikhovna's plump little hands with their short and not overcleannails. All the officers appeared to be, and really were, in love withher that evening. Even those playing cards behind the partition soonleft their game and came over to the samovar, yielding to the generalmood of courting Mary Hendrikhovna. She, seeing herself surrounded bysuch brilliant and polite young men, beamed with satisfaction, try asshe might to hide it, and perturbed as she evidently was each time herhusband moved in his sleep behind her.There was only one spoon, sugar was more plentiful than anything else,but it took too long to dissolve, so it was decided that MaryHendrikhovna should stir the sugar for everyone in turn. Rostov receivedhis tumbler, and adding some rum to it asked Mary Hendrikhovna to stirit."But you take it without sugar?" she said, smiling all the time, as ifeverything she said and everything the others said was very amusing andhad a double meaning."It is not the sugar I want, but only that your little hand should stirmy tea."Mary Hendrikhovna assented and began looking for the spoon which someonemeanwhile had pounced on."Use your finger, Mary Hendrikhovna, it will be still nicer," saidRostov."Too hot!" she replied, blushing with pleasure.Ilyin put a few drops of rum into the bucket of water and brought it toMary Hendrikhovna, asking her to stir it with her finger."This is my cup," said he. "Only dip your finger in it and I'll drink itall up."When they had emptied the samovar, Rostov took a pack of cards andproposed that they should play "Kings" with Mary Hendrikhovna. They drewlots to settle who should make up her set. At Rostov's suggestion it wasagreed that whoever became "King" should have the right to kiss MaryHendrikhovna's hand, and that the "Booby" should go to refill and reheatthe samovar for the doctor when the latter awoke."Well, but supposing Mary Hendrikhovna is 'King'?" asked Ilyin."As it is, she is Queen, and her word is law!"They had hardly begun to play before the doctor's disheveled headsuddenly appeared from behind Mary Hendrikhovna. He had been awake forsome time, listening to what was being said, and evidently found nothingentertaining or amusing in what was going on. His face was sad anddepressed. Without greeting the officers, he scratched himself and askedto be allowed to pass as they were blocking the way. As soon as he hadleft the room all the officers burst into loud laughter and MaryHendrikhovna blushed till her eyes filled with tears and thereby becamestill more attractive to them. Returning from the yard, the doctor toldhis wife (who had ceased to smile so happily, and looked at him inalarm, awaiting her sentence) that the rain had ceased and they must goto sleep in their covered cart, or everything in it would be stolen."But I'll send an orderly.... Two of them!" said Rostov. "What an idea,doctor!""I'll stand guard on it myself!" said Ilyin."No, gentlemen, you have had your sleep, but I have not slept for twonights," replied the doctor, and he sat down morosely beside his wife,waiting for the game to end.Seeing his gloomy face as he frowned at his wife, the officers grewstill merrier, and some of them could not refrain from laughter, forwhich they hurriedly sought plausible pretexts. When he had gone, takinghis wife with him, and had settled down with her in their covered cart,the officers lay down in the tavern, covering themselves with their wetcloaks, but they did not sleep for a long time; now they exchangedremarks, recalling the doctor's uneasiness and his wife's delight, nowthey ran out into the porch and reported what was taking place in thecovered trap. Several times Rostov, covering his head, tried to go tosleep, but some remark would arouse him and conversation would beresumed, to the accompaniment of unreasoning, merry, childlike laughter.CHAPTER XIVIt was nearly three o'clock but no one was yet asleep, when thequartermaster appeared with an order to move on to the little town ofOstrovna. Still laughing and talking, the officers began hurriedlygetting ready and again boiled some muddy water in the samovar. ButRostov went off to his squadron without waiting for tea. Day wasbreaking, the rain had ceased, and the clouds were dispersing. It feltdamp and cold, especially in clothes that were still moist. As they leftthe tavern in the twilight of the dawn, Rostov and Ilyin both glancedunder the wet and glistening leather hood of the doctor's cart, fromunder the apron of which his feet were sticking out, and in the middleof which his wife's nightcap was visible and her sleepy breathingaudible."She really is a dear little thing," said Rostov to Ilyin, who wasfollowing him."A charming woman!" said Ilyin, with all the gravity of a boy ofsixteen.Half an hour later the squadron was lined up on the road. The commandwas heard to "mount" and the soldiers crossed themselves and mounted.Rostov riding in front gave the order "Forward!" and the hussars, withclanking sabers and subdued talk, their horses' hoofs splashing in themud, defiled in fours and moved along the broad road planted with birchtrees on each side, following the infantry and a battery that had goneon in front.Tattered, blue-purple clouds, reddening in the east, were scuddingbefore the wind. It was growing lighter and lighter. That curly grasswhich always grows by country roadsides became clearly visible, stillwet with the night's rain; the drooping branches of the birches, alsowet, swayed in the wind and flung down bright drops of water to oneside. The soldiers' faces were more and more clearly visible. Rostov,always closely followed by Ilyin, rode along the side of the roadbetween two rows of birch trees.When campaigning, Rostov allowed himself the indulgence of riding not aregimental but a Cossack horse. A judge of horses and a sportsman, hehad lately procured himself a large, fine, mettlesome, Donets horse,dun-colored, with light mane and tail, and when he rode it no one couldoutgallop him. To ride this horse was a pleasure to him, and he thoughtof the horse, of the morning, of the doctor's wife, but not once of theimpending danger.Formerly, when going into action, Rostov had felt afraid; now he had notthe least feeling of fear. He was fearless, not because he had grownused to being under fire (one cannot grow used to danger), but becausehe had learned how to manage his thoughts when in danger. He had grownaccustomed when going into action to think about anything but what wouldseem most likely to interest him--the impending danger. During the firstperiod of his service, hard as he tried and much as he reproachedhimself with cowardice, he had not been able to do this, but with timeit had come of itself. Now he rode beside Ilyin under the birch trees,occasionally plucking leaves from a branch that met his hand, sometimestouching his horse's side with his foot, or, without turning round,handing a pipe he had finished to an hussar riding behind him, with ascalm and careless an air as though he were merely out for a ride. Heglanced with pity at the excited face of Ilyin, who talked much and ingreat agitation. He knew from experience the tormenting expectation ofterror and death the cornet was suffering and knew that only time couldhelp him.As soon as the sun appeared in a clear strip of sky beneath the clouds,the wind fell, as if it dared not spoil the beauty of the summer morningafter the storm; drops still continued to fall, but vertically now, andall was still. The whole sun appeared on the horizon and disappearedbehind a long narrow cloud that hung above it. A few minutes later itreappeared brighter still from behind the top of the cloud, tearing itsedge. Everything grew bright and glittered. And with that light, and asif in reply to it, came the sound of guns ahead of them.Before Rostov had had time to consider and determine the distance ofthat firing, Count Ostermann-Tolstoy's adjutant came galloping fromVitebsk with orders to advance at a trot along the road.The squadron overtook and passed the infantry and the battery--which hadalso quickened their pace--rode down a hill, and passing through anempty and deserted village again ascended. The horses began to latherand the men to flush."Halt! Dress your ranks!" the order of the regimental commander washeard ahead. "Forward by the left. Walk, march!" came the order from infront.And the hussars, passing along the line of troops on the left flank ofour position, halted behind our uhlans who were in the front line. Tothe right stood our infantry in a dense column: they were the reserve.Higher up the hill, on the very horizon, our guns were visible throughthe wonderfully clear air, brightly illuminated by slanting morningsunbeams. In front, beyond a hollow dale, could be seen the enemy'scolumns and guns. Our advanced line, already in action, could be heardbriskly exchanging shots with the enemy in the dale.At these sounds, long unheard, Rostov's spirits rose, as at the strainsof the merriest music. Trap-ta-ta-tap! cracked the shots, now together,now several quickly one after another. Again all was silent and thenagain it sounded as if someone were walking on detonators and explodingthem.The hussars remained in the same place for about an hour. A cannonadebegan. Count Ostermann with his suite rode up behind the squadron,halted, spoke to the commander of the regiment, and rode up the hill tothe guns.After Ostermann had gone, a command rang out to the uhlans."Form column! Prepare to charge!"The infantry in front of them parted into platoons to allow the cavalryto pass. The uhlans started, the streamers on their spears fluttering,and trotted downhill toward the French cavalry which was seen below tothe left.As soon as the uhlans descended the hill, the hussars were ordered upthe hill to support the battery. As they took the places vacated by theuhlans, bullets came from the front, whining and whistling, but fellspent without taking effect.The sounds, which he had not heard for so long, had an even morepleasurable and exhilarating effect on Rostov than the previous soundsof firing. Drawing himself up, he viewed the field of battle opening outbefore him from the hill, and with his whole soul followed the movementof the uhlans. They swooped down close to the French dragoons, somethingconfused happened there amid the smoke, and five minutes later ouruhlans were galloping back, not to the place they had occupied but moreto the left, and among the orange-colored uhlans on chestnut horses andbehind them, in a large group, blue French dragoons on gray horses couldbe seen.CHAPTER XVRostov, with his keen sportsman's eye, was one of the first to catchsight of these blue French dragoons pursuing our uhlans. Nearer andnearer in disorderly crowds came the uhlans and the French dragoonspursuing them. He could already see how these men, who looked so smallat the foot of the hill, jostled and overtook one another, waving theirarms and their sabers in the air.Rostov gazed at what was happening before him as at a hunt. He feltinstinctively that if the hussars struck at the French dragoons now, thelatter could not withstand them, but if a charge was to be made it mustbe done now, at that very moment, or it would be too late. He lookedaround. A captain, standing beside him, was gazing like himself witheyes fixed on the cavalry below them."Andrew Sevastyanych!" said Rostov. "You know, we could crush them....""A fine thing too!" replied the captain, "and really..."Rostov, without waiting to hear him out, touched his horse, galloped tothe front of his squadron, and before he had time to finish giving theword of command, the whole squadron, sharing his feeling, was followinghim. Rostov himself did not know how or why he did it. He acted as hedid when hunting, without reflecting or considering. He saw the dragoonsnear and that they were galloping in disorder; he knew they could notwithstand an attack--knew there was only that moment and that if he letit slip it would not return. The bullets were whining and whistling sostimulatingly around him and his horse was so eager to go that he couldnot restrain himself. He touched his horse, gave the word of command,and immediately, hearing behind him the tramp of the horses of hisdeployed squadron, rode at full trot downhill toward the dragoons.Hardly had they reached the bottom of the hill before their paceinstinctively changed to a gallop, which grew faster and faster as theydrew nearer to our uhlans and the French dragoons who galloped afterthem. The dragoons were now close at hand. On seeing the hussars, theforemost began to turn, while those behind began to halt. With the samefeeling with which he had galloped across the path of a wolf, Rostovgave rein to his Donets horse and galloped to intersect the path of thedragoons' disordered lines. One Uhlan stopped, another who was on footflung himself to the ground to avoid being knocked over, and a riderlesshorse fell in among the hussars. Nearly all the French dragoons weregalloping back. Rostov, picking out one on a gray horse, dashed afterhim. On the way he came upon a bush, his gallant horse cleared it, andalmost before he had righted himself in his saddle he saw that he wouldimmediately overtake the enemy he had selected. That Frenchman, by hisuniform an officer, was going at a gallop, crouching on his gray horseand urging it on with his saber. In another moment Rostov's horse dashedits breast against the hindquarters of the officer's horse, almostknocking it over, and at the same instant Rostov, without knowing why,raised his saber and struck the Frenchman with it.The instant he had done this, all Rostov's animation vanished. Theofficer fell, not so much from the blow--which had but slightly cut hisarm above the elbow--as from the shock to his horse and from fright.Rostov reined in his horse, and his eyes sought his foe to see whom hehad vanquished. The French dragoon officer was hopping with one foot onthe ground, the other being caught in the stirrup. His eyes, screwed upwith fear as if he every moment expected another blow, gazed up atRostov with shrinking terror. His pale and mud-stained face--fair andyoung, with a dimple in the chin and light-blue eyes--was not an enemy'sface at all suited to a battlefield, but a most ordinary, homelike face.Before Rostov had decided what to do with him, the officer cried, "Isurrender!" He hurriedly but vainly tried to get his foot out of thestirrup and did not remove his frightened blue eyes from Rostov's face.Some hussars who galloped up disengaged his foot and helped him into thesaddle. On all sides, the hussars were busy with the dragoons; one waswounded, but though his face was bleeding, he would not give up hishorse; another was perched up behind an hussar with his arms round him;a third was being helped by an hussar to mount his horse. In front, theFrench infantry were firing as they ran. The hussars galloped hastilyback with their prisoners. Rostov galloped back with the rest, aware ofan unpleasant feeling of depression in his heart. Something vague andconfused, which he could not at all account for, had come over him withthe capture of that officer and the blow he had dealt him.Count Ostermann-Tolstoy met the returning hussars, sent for Rostov,thanked him, and said he would report his gallant deed to the Emperorand would recommend him for a St. George's Cross. When sent for by CountOstermann, Rostov, remembering that he had charged without orders, feltsure his commander was sending for him to punish him for breach ofdiscipline. Ostermann's flattering words and promise of a reward shouldtherefore have struck him all the more pleasantly, but he still feltthat same vaguely disagreeable feeling of moral nausea. "But what onearth is worrying me?" he asked himself as he rode back from thegeneral. "Ilyin? No, he's safe. Have I disgraced myself in any way? No,that's not it." Something else, resembling remorse, tormented him. "Yes,oh yes, that French officer with the dimple. And I remember how my armpaused when I raised it."Rostov saw the prisoners being led away and galloped after them to havea look at his Frenchman with the dimple on his chin. He was sitting inhis foreign uniform on an hussar packhorse and looked anxiously abouthim; The sword cut on his arm could scarcely be called a wound. Heglanced at Rostov with a feigned smile and waved his hand in greeting.Rostov still had the same indefinite feeling, as of shame.All that day and the next his friends and comrades noticed that Rostov,without being dull or angry, was silent, thoughtful, and preoccupied. Hedrank reluctantly, tried to remain alone, and kept turning somethingover in his mind.Rostov was always thinking about that brilliant exploit of his, which tohis amazement had gained him the St. George's Cross and even given him areputation for bravery, and there was something he could not at allunderstand. "So others are even more afraid than I am!" he thought. "Sothat's all there is in what is called heroism! And did I do it for mycountry's sake? And how was he to blame, with his dimple and blue eyes?And how frightened he was! He thought that I should kill him. Why shouldI kill him? My hand trembled. And they have given me a St. George'sCross.... I can't make it out at all."But while Nicholas was considering these questions and still could reachno clear solution of what puzzled him so, the wheel of fortune in theservice, as often happens, turned in his favor. After the affair atOstrovna he was brought into notice, received command of an hussarbattalion, and when a brave officer was needed he was chosen.CHAPTER XVIOn receiving news of Natasha's illness, the countess, though not quitewell yet and still weak, went to Moscow with Petya and the rest of thehousehold, and the whole family moved from Marya Dmitrievna's house totheir own and settled down in town.Natasha's illness was so serious that, fortunately for her and for herparents, the consideration of all that had caused the illness, herconduct and the breaking off of her engagement, receded into thebackground. She was so ill that it was impossible for them to considerin how far she was to blame for what had happened. She could not eat orsleep, grew visibly thinner, coughed, and, as the doctors made themfeel, was in danger. They could not think of anything but how to helpher. Doctors came to see her singly and in consultation, talked much inFrench, German, and Latin, blamed one another, and prescribed a greatvariety of medicines for all the diseases known to them, but the simpleidea never occurred to any of them that they could not know the diseaseNatasha was suffering from, as no disease suffered by a live man can beknown, for every living person has his own peculiarities and always hashis own peculiar, personal, novel, complicated disease, unknown tomedicine--not a disease of the lungs, liver, skin, heart, nerves, and soon mentioned in medical books, but a disease consisting of one of theinnumerable combinations of the maladies of those organs. This simplethought could not occur to the doctors (as it cannot occur to a wizardthat he is unable to work his charms) because the business of theirlives was to cure, and they received money for it and had spent the bestyears of their lives on that business. But, above all, that thought waskept out of their minds by the fact that they saw they were reallyuseful, as in fact they were to the whole Rostov family. Theirusefulness did not depend on making the patient swallow substances forthe most part harmful (the harm was scarcely perceptible, as they weregiven in small doses), but they were useful, necessary, andindispensable because they satisfied a mental need of the invalid and ofthose who loved her--and that is why there are, and always will be,pseudo-healers, wise women, homeopaths, and allopaths. They satisfiedthat eternal human need for hope of relief, for sympathy, and thatsomething should be done, which is felt by those who are suffering. Theysatisfied the need seen in its most elementary form in a child, when itwants to have a place rubbed that has been hurt. A child knocks itselfand runs at once to the arms of its mother or nurse to have the achingspot rubbed or kissed, and it feels better when this is done. The childcannot believe that the strongest and wisest of its people have noremedy for its pain, and the hope of relief and the expression of itsmother's sympathy while she rubs the bump comforts it. The doctors wereof use to Natasha because they kissed and rubbed her bump, assuring herthat it would soon pass if only the coachman went to the chemist's inthe Arbat and got a powder and some pills in a pretty box for a rubleand seventy kopeks, and if she took those powders in boiled water atintervals of precisely two hours, neither more nor less.What would Sonya and the count and countess have done, how would theyhave looked, if nothing had been done, if there had not been those pillsto give by the clock, the warm drinks, the chicken cutlets, and all theother details of life ordered by the doctors, the carrying out of whichsupplied an occupation and consolation to the family circle? How wouldthe count have borne his dearly loved daughter's illness had he notknown that it was costing him a thousand rubles, and that he would notgrudge thousands more to benefit her, or had he not known that if herillness continued he would not grudge yet other thousands and would takeher abroad for consultations there, and had he not been able to explainthe details of how Metivier and Feller had not understood the symptoms,but Frise had, and Mudrov had diagnosed them even better? What would thecountess have done had she not been able sometimes to scold the invalidfor not strictly obeying the doctor's orders?"You'll never get well like that," she would say, forgetting her griefin her vexation, "if you won't obey the doctor and take your medicine atthe right time! You mustn't trifle with it, you know, or it may turn topneumonia," she would go on, deriving much comfort from the utterance ofthat foreign word, incomprehensible to others as well as to herself.What would Sonya have done without the glad consciousness that she hadnot undressed during the first three nights, in order to be ready tocarry out all the doctor's injunctions with precision, and that shestill kept awake at night so as not to miss the proper time when theslightly harmful pills in the little gilt box had to be administered?Even to Natasha herself it was pleasant to see that so many sacrificeswere being made for her sake, and to know that she had to take medicineat certain hours, though she declared that no medicine would cure herand that it was all nonsense. And it was even pleasant to be able toshow, by disregarding the orders, that she did not believe in medicaltreatment and did not value her life.The doctor came every day, felt her pulse, looked at her tongue, andregardless of her grief-stricken face joked with her. But when he hadgone into another room, to which the countess hurriedly followed him, heassumed a grave air and thoughtfully shaking his head said that thoughthere was danger, he had hopes of the effect of this last medicine andone must wait and see, that the malady was chiefly mental, but... Andthe countess, trying to conceal the action from herself and from him,slipped a gold coin into his hand and always returned to the patientwith a more tranquil mind.The symptoms of Natasha's illness were that she ate little, sleptlittle, coughed, and was always low-spirited. The doctors said that shecould not get on without medical treatment, so they kept her in thestifling atmosphere of the town, and the Rostovs did not move to thecountry that summer of 1812.In spite of the many pills she swallowed and the drops and powders outof the little bottles and boxes of which Madame Schoss who was fond ofsuch things made a large collection, and in spite of being deprived ofthe country life to which she was accustomed, youth prevailed. Natasha'sgrief began to be overlaid by the impressions of daily life, it ceasedto press so painfully on her heart, it gradually faded into the past,and she began to recover physically.CHAPTER XVIINatasha was calmer but no happier. She not merely avoided all externalforms of pleasure--balls, promenades, concerts, and theaters--but shenever laughed without a sound of tears in her laughter. She could notsing. As soon as she began to laugh, or tried to sing by herself, tearschoked her: tears of remorse, tears at the recollection of those puretimes which could never return, tears of vexation that she should souselessly have ruined her young life which might have been so happy.Laughter and singing in particular seemed to her like a blasphemy, inface of her sorrow. Without any need of self-restraint, no wish tocoquet ever entered her head. She said and felt at that time that no manwas more to her than Nastasya Ivanovna, the buffoon. Something stoodsentinel within her and forbade her every joy. Besides, she had lost allthe old interests of her carefree girlish life that had been so full ofhope. The previous autumn, the hunting, "Uncle," and the Christmasholidays spent with Nicholas at Otradnoe were what she recalled oftenestand most painfully. What would she not have given to bring back even asingle day of that time! But it was gone forever. Her presentiment atthe time had not deceived her--that that state of freedom and readinessfor any enjoyment would not return again. Yet it was necessary to liveon.It comforted her to reflect that she was not better as she had formerlyimagined, but worse, much worse, than anybody else in the world. Butthis was not enough. She knew that, and asked herself, "What next?" Butthere was nothing to come. There was no joy in life, yet life waspassing. Natasha apparently tried not to be a burden or a hindrance toanyone, but wanted nothing for herself. She kept away from everyone inthe house and felt at ease only with her brother Petya. She liked to bewith him better than with the others, and when alone with him shesometimes laughed. She hardly ever left the house and of those who cameto see them was glad to see only one person, Pierre. It would have beenimpossible to treat her with more delicacy, greater care, and at thesame time more seriously than did Count Bezukhov. Natasha unconsciouslyfelt this delicacy and so found great pleasure in his society. But shewas not even grateful to him for it; nothing good on Pierre's partseemed to her to be an effort, it seemed so natural for him to be kindto everyone that there was no merit in his kindness. Sometimes Natashanoticed embarrassment and awkwardness on his part in her presence,especially when he wanted to do something to please her, or feared thatsomething they spoke of would awaken memories distressing to her. Shenoticed this and attributed it to his general kindness and shyness,which she imagined must be the same toward everyone as it was to her.After those involuntary words--that if he were free he would have askedon his knees for her hand and her love--uttered at a moment when she wasso strongly agitated, Pierre never spoke to Natasha of his feelings; andit seemed plain to her that those words, which had then so comfortedher, were spoken as all sorts of meaningless words are spoken to comforta crying child. It was not because Pierre was a married man, but becauseNatasha felt very strongly with him that moral barrier the absence ofwhich she had experienced with Kuragin that it never entered her headthat the relations between him and herself could lead to love on herpart, still less on his, or even to the kind of tender, self-conscious,romantic friendship between a man and a woman of which she had knownseveral instances.Before the end of the fast of St. Peter, Agrafena Ivanovna Belova, acountry neighbor of the Rostovs, came to Moscow to pay her devotions atthe shrines of the Moscow saints. She suggested that Natasha should fastand prepare for Holy Communion, and Natasha gladly welcomed the idea.Despite the doctor's orders that she should not go out early in themorning, Natasha insisted on fasting and preparing for the sacrament,not as they generally prepared for it in the Rostov family by attendingthree services in their own house, but as Agrafena Ivanovna did, bygoing to church every day for a week and not once missing Vespers,Matins, or Mass.The countess was pleased with Natasha's zeal; after the poor results ofthe medical treatment, in the depths of her heart she hoped that prayermight help her daughter more than medicines and, though not without fearand concealing it from the doctor, she agreed to Natasha's wish andentrusted her to Belova. Agrafena Ivanovna used to come to wake Natashaat three in the morning, but generally found her already awake. She wasafraid of being late for Matins. Hastily washing, and meekly putting onher shabbiest dress and an old mantilla, Natasha, shivering in the freshair, went out into the deserted streets lit by the clear light of dawn.By Agrafena Ivanovna's advice Natasha prepared herself not in their ownparish, but at a church where, according to the devout AgrafenaIvanovna, the priest was a man of very severe and lofty life. There werenever many people in the church; Natasha always stood beside Belova inthe customary place before an icon of the Blessed Virgin, let into thescreen before the choir on the left side, and a feeling, new to her, ofhumility before something great and incomprehensible, seized her when atthat unusual morning hour, gazing at the dark face of the Virginilluminated by the candles burning before it and by the morning lightfalling from the window, she listened to the words of the service whichshe tried to follow with understanding. When she understood them herpersonal feeling became interwoven in the prayers with shades of itsown. When she did not understand, it was sweeter still to think that thewish to understand everything is pride, that it is impossible tounderstand all, that it is only necessary to believe and to commitoneself to God, whom she felt guiding her soul at those moments. Shecrossed herself, bowed low, and when she did not understand, in horrorat her own vileness, simply asked God to forgive her everything,everything, to have mercy upon her. The prayers to which she surrenderedherself most of all were those of repentance. On her way home at anearly hour when she met no one but bricklayers going to work or mensweeping the street, and everybody within the houses was still asleep,Natasha experienced a feeling new to her, a sense of the possibility ofcorrecting her faults, the possibility of a new, clean life, and ofhappiness.During the whole week she spent in this way, that feeling grew everyday. And the happiness of taking communion, or "communing" as AgrafenaIvanovna, joyously playing with the word, called it, seemed to Natashaso great that she felt she should never live till that blessed Sunday.But the happy day came, and on that memorable Sunday, when, dressed inwhite muslin, she returned home after communion, for the first time formany months she felt calm and not oppressed by the thought of the lifethat lay before her.The doctor who came to see her that day ordered her to continue thepowders he had prescribed a fortnight previously."She must certainly go on taking them morning and evening," said he,evidently sincerely satisfied with his success. "Only, please beparticular about it."Be quite easy," he continued playfully, as he adroitly took the goldcoin in his palm. "She will soon be singing and frolicking about. Thelast medicine has done her a very great deal of good. She has freshenedup very much."The countess, with a cheerful expression on her face, looked down at hernails and spat a little for luck as she returned to the drawing room.CHAPTER XVIIIAt the beginning of July more and more disquieting reports about the warbegan to spread in Moscow; people spoke of an appeal by the Emperor tothe people, and of his coming himself from the army to Moscow. And as upto the eleventh of July no manifesto or appeal had been received,exaggerated reports became current about them and about the position ofRussia. It was said that the Emperor was leaving the army because it wasin danger, it was said that Smolensk had surrendered, that Napoleon hadan army of a million and only a miracle could save Russia.On the eleventh of July, which was Saturday, the manifesto was receivedbut was not yet in print, and Pierre, who was at the Rostovs', promisedto come to dinner next day, Sunday, and bring a copy of the manifestoand appeal, which he would obtain from Count Rostopchin.That Sunday, the Rostovs went to Mass at the Razumovskis' private chapelas usual. It was a hot July day. Even at ten o'clock, when the Rostovsgot out of their carriage at the chapel, the sultry air, the shouts ofhawkers, the light and gay summer clothes of the crowd, the dusty leavesof the trees on the boulevard, the sounds of the band and the whitetrousers of a battalion marching to parade, the rattling of wheels onthe cobblestones, and the brilliant, hot sunshine were all full of thatsummer languor, that content and discontent with the present, which ismost strongly felt on a bright, hot day in town. All the Moscownotabilities, all the Rostovs' acquaintances, were at the Razumovskis'chapel, for, as if expecting something to happen, many wealthy familieswho usually left town for their country estates had not gone away thatsummer. As Natasha, at her mother's side, passed through the crowdbehind a liveried footman who cleared the way for them, she heard ayoung man speaking about her in too loud a whisper."That's Rostova, the one who...""She's much thinner, but all the same she's pretty!"She heard, or thought she heard, the names of Kuragin and Bolkonski. Butshe was always imagining that. It always seemed to her that everyone wholooked at her was thinking only of what had happened to her. With asinking heart, wretched as she always was now when she found herself ina crowd, Natasha in her lilac silk dress trimmed with black lace walked--as women can walk--with the more repose and stateliness the greater thepain and shame in her soul. She knew for certain that she was pretty,but this no longer gave her satisfaction as it used to. On the contraryit tormented her more than anything else of late, and particularly so onthis bright, hot summer day in town. "It's Sunday again--another weekpast," she thought, recalling that she had been here the Sunday before,"and always the same life that is no life, and the same surroundings inwhich it used to be so easy to live. I'm pretty, I'm young, and I knowthat now I am good. I used to be bad, but now I know I am good," shethought, "but yet my best years are slipping by and are no good toanyone." She stood by her mother's side and exchanged nods withacquaintances near her. From habit she scrutinized the ladies' dresses,condemned the bearing of a lady standing close by who was not crossingherself properly but in a cramped manner, and again she thought withvexation that she was herself being judged and was judging others, andsuddenly, at the sound of the service, she felt horrified at her ownvileness, horrified that the former purity of her soul was again lost toher.A comely, fresh-looking old man was conducting the service with thatmild solemnity which has so elevating and soothing an effect on thesouls of the worshipers. The gates of the sanctuary screen were closed,the curtain was slowly drawn, and from behind it a soft mysterious voicepronounced some words. Tears, the cause of which she herself did notunderstand, made Natasha's breast heave, and a joyous but oppressivefeeling agitated her."Teach me what I should do, how to live my life, how I may grow goodforever, forever!" she pleaded.The deacon came out onto the raised space before the altar screen and,holding his thumb extended, drew his long hair from under his dalmaticand, making the sign of the cross on his breast, began in a loud andsolemn voice to recite the words of the prayer..."In peace let us pray unto the Lord.""As one community, without distinction of class, without enmity, unitedby brotherly love--let us pray!" thought Natasha."For the peace that is from above, and for the salvation of our souls.""For the world of angels and all the spirits who dwell above us," prayedNatasha.When they prayed for the warriors, she thought of her brother andDenisov. When they prayed for all traveling by land and sea, sheremembered Prince Andrew, prayed for him, and asked God to forgive herall the wrongs she had done him. When they prayed for those who love us,she prayed for the members of her own family, her father and mother andSonya, realizing for the first time how wrongly she had acted towardthem, and feeling all the strength of her love for them. When theyprayed for those who hate us, she tried to think of her enemies andpeople who hated her, in order to pray for them. She included among herenemies the creditors and all who had business dealings with her father,and always at the thought of enemies and those who hated her sheremembered Anatole who had done her so much harm--and though he did nothate her she gladly prayed for him as for an enemy. Only at prayer didshe feel able to think clearly and calmly of Prince Andrew and Anatole,as men for whom her feelings were as nothing compared with her awe anddevotion to God. When they prayed for the Imperial family and the Synod,she bowed very low and made the sign of the cross, saying to herselfthat even if she did not understand, still she could not doubt, and atany rate loved the governing Synod and prayed for it.When he had finished the Litany the deacon crossed the stole over hisbreast and said, "Let us commit ourselves and our whole lives to Christthe Lord!""Commit ourselves to God," Natasha inwardly repeated. "Lord God, Isubmit myself to Thy will!" she thought. "I want nothing, wish fornothing; teach me what to do and how to use my will! Take me, take me!"prayed Natasha, with impatient emotion in her heart, not crossingherself but letting her slender arms hang down as if expecting someinvisible power at any moment to take her and deliver her from herself,from her regrets, desires, remorse, hopes, and sins.The countess looked round several times at her daughter's softened faceand shining eyes and prayed God to help her.Unexpectedly, in the middle of the service, and not in the usual orderNatasha knew so well, the deacon brought out a small stool, the one heknelt on when praying on Trinity Sunday, and placed it before the doorsof the sanctuary screen. The priest came out with his purple velvetbiretta on his head, adjusted his hair, and knelt down with an effort.Everybody followed his example and they looked at one another insurprise. Then came the prayer just received from the Synod--a prayerfor the deliverance of Russia from hostile invasion."Lord God of might, God of our salvation!" began the priest in thatvoice, clear, not grandiloquent but mild, in which only the Slav clergyread and which acts so irresistibly on a Russian heart."Lord God of might, God of our salvation! Look this day in mercy andblessing on Thy humble people, and graciously hear us, spare us, andhave mercy upon us! This foe confounding Thy land, desiring to lay wastethe whole world, rises against us; these lawless men are gatheredtogether to overthrow Thy kingdom, to destroy Thy dear Jerusalem, Thybeloved Russia; to defile Thy temples, to overthrow Thine altars, and todesecrate our holy shrines. How long, O Lord, how long shall the wickedtriumph? How long shall they wield unlawful power?"Lord God! Hear us when we pray to Thee; strengthen with Thy might ourmost gracious sovereign lord, the Emperor Alexander Pavlovich; bemindful of his uprightness and meekness, reward him according to hisrighteousness, and let it preserve us, Thy chosen Israel! Bless hiscounsels, his undertakings, and his work; strengthen his kingdom byThine almighty hand, and give him victory over his enemy, even as Thougavest Moses the victory over Amalek, Gideon over Midian, and David overGoliath. Preserve his army, put a bow of brass in the hands of those whohave armed themselves in Thy Name, and gird their loins with strengthfor the fight. Take up the spear and shield and arise to help us;confound and put to shame those who have devised evil against us, maythey be before the faces of Thy faithful warriors as dust before thewind, and may Thy mighty Angel confound them and put them to flight; maythey be ensnared when they know it not, and may the plots they have laidin secret be turned against them; let them fall before Thy servants'feet and be laid low by our hosts! Lord, Thou art able to save bothgreat and small; Thou art God, and man cannot prevail against Thee!"God of our fathers! Remember Thy bounteous mercy and loving-kindnesswhich are from of old; turn not Thy face from us, but be gracious to ourunworthiness, and in Thy great goodness and Thy many mercies regard notour transgressions and iniquities! Create in us a clean heart and renewa right spirit within us, strengthen us all in Thy faith, fortify ourhope, inspire us with true love one for another, arm us with unity ofspirit in the righteous defense of the heritage Thou gavest to us and toour fathers, and let not the scepter of the wicked be exalted againstthe destiny of those Thou hast sanctified."O Lord our God, in whom we believe and in whom we put our trust, let usnot be confounded in our hope of Thy mercy, and give us a token of Thyblessing, that those who hate us and our Orthodox faith may see it andbe put to shame and perish, and may all the nations know that Thou artthe Lord and we are Thy people. Show Thy mercy upon us this day, O Lord,and grant us Thy salvation; make the hearts of Thy servants to rejoicein Thy mercy; smite down our enemies and destroy them swiftly beneaththe feet of Thy faithful servants! For Thou art the defense, the succor,and the victory of them that put their trust in Thee, and to Thee be allglory, to Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, now and forever, world withoutend. Amen."In Natasha's receptive condition of soul this prayer affected herstrongly. She listened to every word about the victory of Moses overAmalek, of Gideon over Midian, and of David over Goliath, and about thedestruction of "Thy Jerusalem," and she prayed to God with thetenderness and emotion with which her heart was overflowing, but withoutfully understanding what she was asking of God in that prayer. Sheshared with all her heart in the prayer for the spirit of righteousness,for the strengthening of the heart by faith and hope, and its animationby love. But she could not pray that her enemies might be trampled underfoot when but a few minutes before she had been wishing she had more ofthem that she might pray for them. But neither could she doubt therighteousness of the prayer that was being read on bended knees. Shefelt in her heart a devout and tremulous awe at the thought of thepunishment that overtakes men for their sins, and especially of her ownsins, and she prayed to God to forgive them all, and her too, and togive them all, and her too, peace and happiness. And it seemed to herthat God heard her prayer.CHAPTER XIXFrom the day when Pierre, after leaving the Rostovs' with Natasha'sgrateful look fresh in his mind, had gazed at the comet that seemed tobe fixed in the sky and felt that something new was appearing on his ownhorizon--from that day the problem of the vanity and uselessness of allearthly things, that had incessantly tormented him, no longer presenteditself. That terrible question "Why?" "Wherefore?" which had come to himamid every occupation, was now replaced, not by another question or by areply to the former question, but by her image. When he listened to, orhimself took part in, trivial conversations, when he read or heard ofhuman baseness or folly, he was not horrified as formerly, and did notask himself why men struggled so about these things when all is sotransient and incomprehensible--but he remembered her as he had lastseen her, and all his doubts vanished--not because she had answered thequestions that had haunted him, but because his conception of hertransferred him instantly to another, a brighter, realm of spiritualactivity in which no one could be justified or guilty--a realm of beautyand love which it was worth living for. Whatever worldly basenesspresented itself to him, he said to himself:"Well, supposing N. N. swindled the country and the Tsar, and thecountry and the Tsar confer honors upon him, what does that matter? Shesmiled at me yesterday and asked me to come again, and I love her, andno one will ever know it." And his soul felt calm and peaceful.Pierre still went into society, drank as much and led the same idle anddissipated life, because besides the hours he spent at the Rostovs'there were other hours he had to spend somehow, and the habits andacquaintances he had made in Moscow formed a current that bore him alongirresistibly. But latterly, when more and more disquieting reports camefrom the seat of war and Natasha's health began to improve and she nolonger aroused in him the former feeling of careful pity, an ever-increasing restlessness, which he could not explain, took possession ofhim. He felt that the condition he was in could not continue long, thata catastrophe was coming which would change his whole life, and heimpatiently sought everywhere for signs of that approaching catastrophe.One of his brother Masons had revealed to Pierre the following prophecyconcerning Napoleon, drawn from the Revelation of St. John.In chapter 13, verse 18, of the Apocalypse, it is said:Here is wisdom. Let him that hath understanding count the number of thebeast: for it is the number of a man; and his number is Six hundredthreescore and six.And in the fifth verse of the same chapter:And there was given unto him a mouth speaking great things andblasphemies; and power was given unto him to continue forty and twomonths.The French alphabet, written out with the same numerical values as theHebrew, in which the first nine letters denote units and the otherstens, will have the following significance:a   b   c   d   e   f   g   h   i   k 1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   910 l    m    n    o    p    q    r    s 20   30   40   50   60   70   8090 t    u    v    w    x    y 100  110  120  130  140  150 z 160Writing the words L'Empereur Napoleon in numbers, it appears that thesum of them is 666, and that Napoleon was therefore the beast foretoldin the Apocalypse. Moreover, by applying the same system to the wordsquarante-deux, * which was the term allowed to the beast that "spokegreat things and blasphemies," the same number 666 was obtained; fromwhich it followed that the limit fixed for Napoleon's power had come inthe year 1812 when the French emperor was forty-two. This prophecypleased Pierre very much and he often asked himself what would put anend to the power of the beast, that is, of Napoleon, and tried by thesame system of using letters as numbers and adding them up, to find ananswer to the question that engrossed him. He wrote the words L'EmpereurAlexandre, La nation russe and added up their numbers, but the sums wereeither more or less than 666. Once when making such calculations hewrote down his own name in French, Comte Pierre Besouhoff, but the sumof the numbers did not come right. Then he changed the spelling,substituting a z for the s and adding de and the article le, stillwithout obtaining the desired result. Then it occurred to him: if theanswer to the question were contained in his name, his nationality wouldalso be given in the answer. So he wrote Le russe Besuhof and adding upthe numbers got 671. This was only five too much, and five wasrepresented by e, the very letter elided from the article le before theword Empereur. By omitting the e, though incorrectly, Pierre got theanswer he sought. L'russe Besuhof made 666. This discovery excited him.How, or by what means, he was connected with the great event foretold inthe Apocalypse he did not know, but he did not doubt that connection fora moment. His love for Natasha, Antichrist, Napoleon, the invasion, thecomet, 666, L'Empereur Napoleon, and L'russe Besuhof--all this had tomature and culminate, to lift him out of that spellbound, petty sphereof Moscow habits in which he felt himself held captive and lead him to agreat achievement and great happiness.* Forty-two.On the eve of the Sunday when the special prayer was read, Pierre hadpromised the Rostovs to bring them, from Count Rostopchin whom he knewwell, both the appeal to the people and the news from the army. In themorning, when he went to call at Rostopchin's he met there a courierfresh from the army, an acquaintance of his own, who often danced atMoscow balls."Do, please, for heaven's sake, relieve me of something!" said thecourier. "I have a sackful of letters to parents."Among these letters was one from Nicholas Rostov to his father. Pierretook that letter, and Rostopchin also gave him the Emperor's appeal toMoscow, which had just been printed, the last army orders, and his ownmost recent bulletin. Glancing through the army orders, Pierre found inone of them, in the lists of killed, wounded, and rewarded, the name ofNicholas Rostov, awarded a St. George's Cross of the Fourth Class forcourage shown in the Ostrovna affair, and in the same order the name ofPrince Andrew Bolkonski, appointed to the command of a regiment ofChasseurs. Though he did not want to remind the Rostovs of Bolkonski,Pierre could not refrain from making them happy by the news of theirson's having received a decoration, so he sent that printed army orderand Nicholas' letter to the Rostovs, keeping the appeal, the bulletin,and the other orders to take with him when he went to dinner.His conversation with Count Rostopchin and the latter's tone of anxioushurry, the meeting with the courier who talked casually of how badlythings were going in the army, the rumors of the discovery of spies inMoscow and of a leaflet in circulation stating that Napoleon promised tobe in both the Russian capitals by the autumn, and the talk of theEmperor's being expected to arrive next day--all aroused with freshforce that feeling of agitation and expectation in Pierre which he hadbeen conscious of ever since the appearance of the comet, and especiallysince the beginning of the war.He had long been thinking of entering the army and would have done sohad he not been hindered, first, by his membership of the Society ofFreemasons to which he was bound by oath and which preached perpetualpeace and the abolition of war, and secondly, by the fact that when hesaw the great mass of Muscovites who had donned uniform and were talkingpatriotism, he somehow felt ashamed to take the step. But the chiefreason for not carrying out his intention to enter the army lay in thevague idea that he was L'russe Besuhof who had the number of the beast,666; that his part in the great affair of setting a limit to the powerof the beast that spoke great and blasphemous things had beenpredestined from eternity, and that therefore he ought not to undertakeanything, but wait for what was bound to come to pass.CHAPTER XXA few intimate friends were dining with the Rostovs that day, as usualon Sundays.Pierre came early so as to find them alone.He had grown so stout this year that he would have been abnormal had henot been so tall, so broad of limb, and so strong that he carried hisbulk with evident ease.He went up the stairs, puffing and muttering something. His coachman didnot even ask whether he was to wait. He knew that when his master was atthe Rostovs' he stayed till midnight. The Rostovs' footman rushedeagerly forward to help him off with his cloak and take his hat andstick. Pierre, from club habit, always left both hat and stick in theanteroom.The first person he saw in the house was Natasha. Even before he sawher, while taking off his cloak, he heard her. She was practicing solfaexercises in the music room. He knew that she had not sung since herillness, and so the sound of her voice surprised and delighted him. Heopened the door softly and saw her, in the lilac dress she had worn atchurch, walking about the room singing. She had her back to him when heopened the door, but when, turning quickly, she saw his broad, surprisedface, she blushed and came rapidly up to him."I want to try to sing again," she said, adding as if by way of excuse,"it is, at least, something to do.""That's capital!""How glad I am you've come! I am so happy today," she said, with the oldanimation Pierre had not seen in her for a long time. "You know Nicholashas received a St. George's Cross? I am so proud of him.""Oh yes, I sent that announcement. But I don't want to interrupt you,"he added, and was about to go to the drawing room.Natasha stopped him."Count, is it wrong of me to sing?" she said blushing, and fixing hereyes inquiringly on him."No... Why should it be? On the contrary... But why do you ask me?""I don't know myself," Natasha answered quickly, "but I should not liketo do anything you disapproved of. I believe in you completely. Youdon't know how important you are to me, how much you've done for me...."She spoke rapidly and did not notice how Pierre flushed at her words. "Isaw in that same army order that he, Bolkonski" (she whispered the namehastily), "is in Russia, and in the army again. What do you think?"--shewas speaking hurriedly, evidently afraid her strength might fail her--"Will he ever forgive me? Will he not always have a bitter feelingtoward me? What do you think? What do you think?""I think..." Pierre replied, "that he has nothing to forgive.... If Iwere in his place..."By association of ideas, Pierre was at once carried back to the daywhen, trying to comfort her, he had said that if he were not himself butthe best man in the world and free, he would ask on his knees for herhand; and the same feeling of pity, tenderness, and love took possessionof him and the same words rose to his lips. But she did not give himtime to say them."Yes, you... you..." she said, uttering the word you rapturously--"that's a different thing. I know no one kinder, more generous, orbetter than you; nobody could be! Had you not been there then, and nowtoo, I don't know what would have become of me, because..."Tears suddenly rose in her eyes, she turned away, lifted her musicbefore her eyes, began singing again, and again began walking up anddown the room.Just then Petya came running in from the drawing room.Petya was now a handsome rosy lad of fifteen with full red lips andresembled Natasha. He was preparing to enter the university, but he andhis friend Obolenski had lately, in secret, agreed to join the hussars.Petya had come rushing out to talk to his namesake about this affair. Hehad asked Pierre to find out whether he would be accepted in thehussars.Pierre walked up and down the drawing room, not listening to what Petyawas saying.Petya pulled him by the arm to attract his attention."Well, what about my plan? Peter Kirilych, for heaven's sake! You are myonly hope," said Petya."Oh yes, your plan. To join the hussars? I'll mention it, I'll bring itall up today.""Well, mon cher, have you got the manifesto?" asked the old count. "Thecountess has been to Mass at the Razumovskis' and heard the new prayer.She says it's very fine.""Yes, I've got it," said Pierre. "The Emperor is to be here tomorrow...there's to be an Extraordinary Meeting of the nobility, and they aretalking of a levy of ten men per thousand. Oh yes, let me congratulateyou!""Yes, yes, thank God! Well, and what news from the army?""We are again retreating. They say we're already near Smolensk," repliedPierre."O Lord, O Lord!" exclaimed the count. "Where is the manifesto?""The Emperor's appeal? Oh yes!"Pierre began feeling in his pockets for the papers, but could not findthem. Still slapping his pockets, he kissed the hand of the countess whoentered the room and glanced uneasily around, evidently expectingNatasha, who had left off singing but had not yet come into the drawingroom."On my word, I don't know what I've done with it," he said."There he is, always losing everything!" remarked the countess.Natasha entered with a softened and agitated expression of face and satdown looking silently at Pierre. As soon as she entered, Pierre'sfeatures, which had been gloomy, suddenly lighted up, and while stillsearching for the papers he glanced at her several times."No, really! I'll drive home, I must have left them there. I'llcertainly...""But you'll be late for dinner.""Oh! And my coachman has gone."But Sonya, who had gone to look for the papers in the anteroom, hadfound them in Pierre's hat, where he had carefully tucked them under thelining. Pierre was about to begin reading."No, after dinner," said the old count, evidently expecting muchenjoyment from that reading.At dinner, at which champagne was drunk to the health of the newchevalier of St. George, Shinshin told them the town news, of theillness of the old Georgian princess, of Metivier's disappearance fromMoscow, and of how some German fellow had been brought to Rostopchin andaccused of being a French "spyer" (so Count Rostopchin had told thestory), and how Rostopchin let him go and assured the people that he was"not a spire at all, but only an old German ruin.""People are being arrested..." said the count. "I've told the countessshe should not speak French so much. It's not the time for it now.""And have you heard?" Shinshin asked. "Prince Golitsyn has engaged amaster to teach him Russian. It is becoming dangerous to speak French inthe streets.""And how about you, Count Peter Kirilych? If they call up the militia,you too will have to mount a horse," remarked the old count, addressingPierre.Pierre had been silent and preoccupied all through dinner, seeming notto grasp what was said. He looked at the count."Oh yes, the war," he said. "No! What sort of warrior should I make? Andyet everything is so strange, so strange! I can't make it out. I don'tknow, I am very far from having military tastes, but in these times noone can answer for himself."After dinner the count settled himself comfortably in an easy chair andwith a serious face asked Sonya, who was considered an excellent reader,to read the appeal."To Moscow, our ancient Capital!"The enemy has entered the borders of Russia with immense forces. Hecomes to despoil our beloved country."Sonya read painstakingly in her high-pitched voice. The count listenedwith closed eyes, heaving abrupt sighs at certain passages.Natasha sat erect, gazing with a searching look now at her father andnow at Pierre.Pierre felt her eyes on him and tried not to look round. The countessshook her head disapprovingly and angrily at every solemn expression inthe manifesto. In all these words she saw only that the dangerthreatening her son would not soon be over. Shinshin, with a sarcasticsmile on his lips, was evidently preparing to make fun of anything thatgave him the opportunity: Sonya's reading, any remark of the count's, oreven the manifesto itself should no better pretext present itself.After reading about the dangers that threatened Russia, the hopes theEmperor placed on Moscow and especially on its illustrious nobility,Sonya, with a quiver in her voice due chiefly to the attention that wasbeing paid to her, read the last words:"We ourselves will not delay to appear among our people in that Capitaland in other parts of our realm for consultation, and for the directionof all our levies, both those now barring the enemy's path and thosefreshly formed to defeat him wherever he may appear. May the ruin hehopes to bring upon us recoil on his own head, and may Europe deliveredfrom bondage glorify the name of Russia!""Yes, that's it!" cried the count, opening his moist eyes and sniffingrepeatedly, as if a strong vinaigrette had been held to his nose; and headded, "Let the Emperor but say the word and we'll sacrifice everythingand begrudge nothing."Before Shinshin had time to utter the joke he was ready to make on thecount's patriotism, Natasha jumped up from her place and ran to herfather."What a darling our Papa is!" she cried, kissing him, and she againlooked at Pierre with the unconscious coquetry that had returned to herwith her better spirits."There! Here's a patriot for you!" said Shinshin."Not a patriot at all, but simply..." Natasha replied in an injuredtone. "Everything seems funny to you, but this isn't at all a joke....""A joke indeed!" put in the count. "Let him but say the word and we'llall go.... We're not Germans!""But did you notice, it says, 'for consultation'?" said Pierre."Never mind what it's for...."At this moment, Petya, to whom nobody was paying any attention, came upto his father with a very flushed face and said in his breaking voicethat was now deep and now shrill:"Well, Papa, I tell you definitely, and Mamma too, it's as you please,but I say definitely that you must let me enter the army, because Ican't... that's all...."The countess, in dismay, looked up to heaven, clasped her hands, andturned angrily to her husband."That comes of your talking!" said she.But the count had already recovered from his excitement."Come, come!" said he. "Here's a fine warrior! No! Nonsense! You muststudy.""It's not nonsense, Papa. Fedya Obolenski is younger than I, and he'sgoing too. Besides, all the same I can't study now when..." Petyastopped short, flushed till he perspired, but still got out the words,"when our Fatherland is in danger.""That'll do, that'll do--nonsense....""But you said yourself that we would sacrifice everything.""Petya! Be quiet, I tell you!" cried the count, with a glance at hiswife, who had turned pale and was staring fixedly at her son."And I tell you--Peter Kirilych here will also tell you...""Nonsense, I tell you. Your mother's milk has hardly dried on your lipsand you want to go into the army! There, there, I tell you," and thecount moved to go out of the room, taking the papers, probably to rereadthem in his study before having a nap."Well, Peter Kirilych, let's go and have a smoke," he said.Pierre was agitated and undecided. Natasha's unwontedly brilliant eyes,continually glancing at him with a more than cordial look, had reducedhim to this condition."No, I think I'll go home.""Home? Why, you meant to spend the evening with us.... You don't oftencome nowadays as it is, and this girl of mine," said the count good-naturedly, pointing to Natasha, "only brightens up when you're here.""Yes, I had forgotten... I really must go home... business..." saidPierre hurriedly."Well, then, au revoir!" said the count, and went out of the room."Why are you going? Why are you upset?" asked Natasha, and she lookedchallengingly into Pierre's eyes."Because I love you!" was what he wanted to say, but he did not say it,and only blushed till the tears came, and lowered his eyes."Because it is better for me to come less often... because... No, simplyI have business....""Why? No, tell me!" Natasha began resolutely and suddenly stopped.They looked at each other with dismayed and embarrassed faces. He triedto smile but could not: his smile expressed suffering, and he silentlykissed her hand and went out.Pierre made up his mind not to go to the Rostovs' any more.CHAPTER XXIAfter the definite refusal he had received, Petya went to his room andthere locked himself in and wept bitterly. When he came in to tea,silent, morose, and with tear-stained face, everybody pretended not tonotice anything.Next day the Emperor arrived in Moscow, and several of the Rostovs'domestic serfs begged permission to go to have a look at him. Thatmorning Petya was a long time dressing and arranging his hair and collarto look like a grown-up man. He frowned before his looking glass,gesticulated, shrugged his shoulders, and finally, without saying a wordto anyone, took his cap and left the house by the back door, trying toavoid notice. Petya decided to go straight to where the Emperor was andto explain frankly to some gentleman-in-waiting (he imagined the Emperorto be always surrounded by gentlemen-in-waiting) that he, Count Rostov,in spite of his youth wished to serve his country; that youth could beno hindrance to loyalty, and that he was ready to... While dressing,Petya had prepared many fine things he meant to say to the gentleman-in-waiting.It was on the very fact of being so young that Petya counted for successin reaching the Emperor--he even thought how surprised everyone would beat his youthfulness--and yet in the arrangement of his collar and hairand by his sedate deliberate walk he wished to appear a grown-up man.But the farther he went and the more his attention was diverted by theever-increasing crowds moving toward the Kremlin, the less he rememberedto walk with the sedateness and deliberation of a man. As he approachedthe Kremlin he even began to avoid being crushed and resolutely stuckout his elbows in a menacing way. But within the Trinity Gateway he wasso pressed to the wall by people who probably were unaware of thepatriotic intentions with which he had come that in spite of all hisdetermination he had to give in, and stop while carriages passed in,rumbling beneath the archway. Beside Petya stood a peasant woman, afootman, two tradesmen, and a discharged soldier. After standing sometime in the gateway, Petya tried to move forward in front of the otherswithout waiting for all the carriages to pass, and he began resolutelyworking his way with his elbows, but the woman just in front of him, whowas the first against whom he directed his efforts, angrily shouted athim:"What are you shoving for, young lordling? Don't you see we're allstanding still? Then why push?""Anybody can shove," said the footman, and also began working his elbowsto such effect that he pushed Petya into a very filthy corner of thegateway.Petya wiped his perspiring face with his hands and pulled up the dampcollar which he had arranged so well at home to seem like a man's.He felt that he no longer looked presentable, and feared that if he werenow to approach the gentlemen-in-waiting in that plight he would not beadmitted to the Emperor. But it was impossible to smarten oneself up ormove to another place, because of the crowd. One of the generals whodrove past was an acquaintance of the Rostovs', and Petya thought ofasking his help, but came to the conclusion that that would not be amanly thing to do. When the carriages had all passed in, the crowd,carrying Petya with it, streamed forward into the Kremlin Square whichwas already full of people. There were people not only in the square,but everywhere--on the slopes and on the roofs. As soon as Petya foundhimself in the square he clearly heard the sound of bells and the joyousvoices of the crowd that filled the whole Kremlin.For a while the crowd was less dense, but suddenly all heads were bared,and everyone rushed forward in one direction. Petya was being pressed sothat he could scarcely breathe, and everybody shouted, "Hurrah! hurrah!hurrah!" Petya stood on tiptoe and pushed and pinched, but could seenothing except the people about him.All the faces bore the same expression of excitement and enthusiasm. Atradesman's wife standing beside Petya sobbed, and the tears ran downher cheeks."Father! Angel! Dear one!" she kept repeating, wiping away her tearswith her fingers."Hurrah!" was heard on all sides.For a moment the crowd stood still, but then it made another rushforward.Quite beside himself, Petya, clinching his teeth and rolling his eyesferociously, pushed forward, elbowing his way and shouting "hurrah!" asif he were prepared that instant to kill himself and everyone else, buton both sides of him other people with similarly ferocious faces pushedforward and everybody shouted "hurrah!""So this is what the Emperor is!" thought Petya. "No, I can't petitionhim myself--that would be too bold." But in spite of this he continuedto struggle desperately forward, and from between the backs of those infront he caught glimpses of an open space with a strip of red clothspread out on it; but just then the crowd swayed back--the police infront were pushing back those who had pressed too close to theprocession: the Emperor was passing from the palace to the Cathedral ofthe Assumption--and Petya unexpectedly received such a blow on his sideand ribs and was squeezed so hard that suddenly everything grew dimbefore his eyes and he lost consciousness. When he came to himself, aman of clerical appearance with a tuft of gray hair at the back of hishead and wearing a shabby blue cassock--probably a church clerk andchanter--was holding him under the arm with one hand while warding offthe pressure of the crowd with the other."You've crushed the young gentleman!" said the clerk. "What are you upto? Gently!... They've crushed him, crushed him!"The Emperor entered the Cathedral of the Assumption. The crowd spreadout again more evenly, and the clerk led Petya--pale and breathless--tothe Tsar-cannon. Several people were sorry for Petya, and suddenly acrowd turned toward him and pressed round him. Those who stood nearesthim attended to him, unbuttoned his coat, seated him on the raisedplatform of the cannon, and reproached those others (whoever they mightbe) who had crushed him."One might easily get killed that way! What do they mean by it? Killingpeople! Poor dear, he's as white as a sheet!"--various voices were heardsaying.Petya soon came to himself, the color returned to his face, the pain hadpassed, and at the cost of that temporary unpleasantness he had obtaineda place by the cannon from where he hoped to see the Emperor who wouldbe returning that way. Petya no longer thought of presenting hispetition. If he could only see the Emperor he would be happy!While the service was proceeding in the Cathedral of the Assumption--itwas a combined service of prayer on the occasion of the Emperor'sarrival and of thanksgiving for the conclusion of peace with the Turks--the crowd outside spread out and hawkers appeared, selling kvas,gingerbread, and poppyseed sweets (of which Petya was particularlyfond), and ordinary conversation could again be heard. A tradesman'swife was showing a rent in her shawl and telling how much the shawl hadcost; another was saying that all silk goods had now got dear. The clerkwho had rescued Petya was talking to a functionary about the priests whowere officiating that day with the bishop. The clerk several times usedthe word "plenary" (of the service), a word Petya did not understand.Two young citizens were joking with some serf girls who were crackingnuts. All these conversations, especially the joking with the girls,were such as might have had a particular charm for Petya at his age, butthey did not interest him now. He sat on his elevation--the pedestal ofthe cannon--still agitated as before by the thought of the Emperor andby his love for him. The feeling of pain and fear he had experiencedwhen he was being crushed, together with that of rapture, still furtherintensified his sense of the importance of the occasion.Suddenly the sound of a firing of cannon was heard from the embankment,to celebrate the signing of peace with the Turks, and the crowd rushedimpetuously toward the embankment to watch the firing. Petya too wouldhave run there, but the clerk who had taken the young gentleman underhis protection stopped him. The firing was still proceeding whenofficers, generals, and gentlemen-in-waiting came running out of thecathedral, and after them others in a more leisurely manner: caps wereagain raised, and those who had run to look at the cannon ran backagain. At last four men in uniforms and sashes emerged from thecathedral doors. "Hurrah! hurrah!" shouted the crowd again."Which is he? Which?" asked Petya in a tearful voice, of those aroundhim, but no one answered him, everybody was too excited; and Petya,fixing on one of those four men, whom he could not clearly see for thetears of joy that filled his eyes, concentrated all his enthusiasm onhim--though it happened not to be the Emperor--frantically shouted"Hurrah!" and resolved that tomorrow, come what might, he would join thearmy.The crowd ran after the Emperor, followed him to the palace, and beganto disperse. It was already late, and Petya had not eaten anything andwas drenched with perspiration, yet he did not go home but stood withthat diminishing, but still considerable, crowd before the palace whilethe Emperor dined--looking in at the palace windows, expecting he knewnot what, and envying alike the notables he saw arriving at the entranceto dine with the Emperor and the court footmen who served at table,glimpses of whom could be seen through the windows.While the Emperor was dining, Valuev, looking out of the window, said:"The people are still hoping to see Your Majesty again."The dinner was nearly over, and the Emperor, munching a biscuit, roseand went out onto the balcony. The people, with Petya among them, rushedtoward the balcony."Angel! Dear one! Hurrah! Father!..." cried the crowd, and Petya withit, and again the women and men of weaker mold, Petya among them, weptwith joy.A largish piece of the biscuit the Emperor was holding in his hand brokeoff, fell on the balcony parapet, and then to the ground. A coachman ina jerkin, who stood nearest, sprang forward and snatched it up. Severalpeople in the crowd rushed at the coachman. Seeing this the Emperor hada plateful of biscuits brought him and began throwing them down from thebalcony. Petya's eyes grew bloodshot, and still more excited by thedanger of being crushed, he rushed at the biscuits. He did not know why,but he had to have a biscuit from the Tsar's hand and he felt that hemust not give way. He sprang forward and upset an old woman who wascatching at a biscuit; the old woman did not consider herself defeatedthough she was lying on the ground--she grabbed at some biscuits but herhand did not reach them. Petya pushed her hand away with his knee,seized a biscuit, and as if fearing to be too late, again shouted"Hurrah!" with a voice already hoarse.The Emperor went in, and after that the greater part of the crowd beganto disperse."There! I said if only we waited--and so it was!" was being joyfullysaid by various people.Happy as Petya was, he felt sad at having to go home knowing that allthe enjoyment of that day was over. He did not go straight home from theKremlin, but called on his friend Obolenski, who was fifteen and wasalso entering the regiment. On returning home Petya announced resolutelyand firmly that if he was not allowed to enter the service he would runaway. And next day, Count Ilya Rostov--though he had not yet quiteyielded--went to inquire how he could arrange for Petya to serve wherethere would be least danger.CHAPTER XXIITwo days later, on the fifteenth of July, an immense number of carriageswere standing outside the Sloboda Palace.The great halls were full. In the first were the nobility and gentry intheir uniforms, in the second bearded merchants in full-skirted coats ofblue cloth and wearing medals. In the noblemen's hall there was anincessant movement and buzz of voices. The chief magnates sat on high-backed chairs at a large table under the portrait of the Emperor, butmost of the gentry were strolling about the room.All these nobles, whom Pierre met every day at the club or in their ownhouses, were in uniform--some in that of Catherine's day, others in thatof Emperor Paul, others again in the new uniforms of Alexander's time orthe ordinary uniform of the nobility, and the general characteristic ofbeing in uniform imparted something strange and fantastic to thesediverse and familiar personalities, both old and young. The old men,dim-eyed, toothless, bald, sallow, and bloated, or gaunt and wrinkled,were especially striking. For the most part they sat quietly in theirplaces and were silent, or, if they walked about and talked, attachedthemselves to someone younger. On all these faces, as on the faces ofthe crowd Petya had seen in the Square, there was a strikingcontradiction: the general expectation of a solemn event, and at thesame time the everyday interests in a boston card party, Peter the cook,Zinaida Dmitrievna's health, and so on.Pierre was there too, buttoned up since early morning in a nobleman'suniform that had become too tight for him. He was agitated; thisextraordinary gathering not only of nobles but also of the merchant-class--les etats generaux (States-General)--evoked in him a whole seriesof ideas he had long laid aside but which were deeply graven in hissoul: thoughts of the Contrat Social and the French Revolution. Thewords that had struck him in the Emperor's appeal--that the sovereignwas coming to the capital for consultation with his people--strengthenedthis idea. And imagining that in this direction something importantwhich he had long awaited was drawing near, he strolled about watchingand listening to conversations, but nowhere finding any confirmation ofthe ideas that occupied him.The Emperor's manifesto was read, evoking enthusiasm, and then all movedabout discussing it. Besides the ordinary topics of conversation, Pierreheard questions of where the marshals of the nobility were to stand whenthe Emperor entered, when a ball should be given in the Emperor's honor,whether they should group themselves by districts or by wholeprovinces... and so on; but as soon as the war was touched on, or whatthe nobility had been convened for, the talk became undecided andindefinite. Then all preferred listening to speaking.A middle-aged man, handsome and virile, in the uniform of a retirednaval officer, was speaking in one of the rooms, and a small crowd waspressing round him. Pierre went up to the circle that had formed roundthe speaker and listened. Count Ilya Rostov, in a military uniform ofCatherine's time, was sauntering with a pleasant smile among the crowd,with all of whom he was acquainted. He too approached that group andlistened with a kindly smile and nods of approval, as he always did, towhat the speaker was saying. The retired naval man was speaking veryboldly, as was evident from the expression on the faces of the listenersand from the fact that some people Pierre knew as the meekest andquietest of men walked away disapprovingly or expressed disagreementwith him. Pierre pushed his way into the middle of the group, listened,and convinced himself that the man was indeed a liberal, but of viewsquite different from his own. The naval officer spoke in a particularlysonorous, musical, and aristocratic baritone voice, pleasantlyswallowing his r's and generally slurring his consonants: the voice of aman calling out to his servant, "Heah! Bwing me my pipe!" It wasindicative of dissipation and the exercise of authority."What if the Smolensk people have offahd to waise militia for theEmpewah? Ah we to take Smolensk as our patte'n? If the noble awistocwacyof the pwovince of Moscow thinks fit, it can show its loyalty to oursov'weign the Empewah in other ways. Have we fo'gotten the waising ofthe militia in the yeah 'seven? All that did was to enwich the pwiests'sons and thieves and wobbahs...."Count Ilya Rostov smiled blandly and nodded approval."And was our militia of any use to the Empia? Not at all! It only wuinedour farming! Bettah have another conscwiption... o' ou' men will wetu'nneithah soldiers no' peasants, and we'll get only depwavity fwom them.The nobility don't gwudge theah lives--evewy one of us will go and bwingin more wecwuits, and the sov'weign" (that was the way he referred tothe Emperor) "need only say the word and we'll all die fo' him!" addedthe orator with animation.Count Rostov's mouth watered with pleasure and he nudged Pierre, butPierre wanted to speak himself. He pushed forward, feeling stirred, butnot yet sure what stirred him or what he would say. Scarcely had heopened his mouth when one of the senators, a man without a tooth in hishead, with a shrewd though angry expression, standing near the firstspeaker, interrupted him. Evidently accustomed to managing debates andto maintaining an argument, he began in low but distinct tones:"I imagine, sir," said he, mumbling with his toothless mouth, "that wehave been summoned here not to discuss whether it's best for the empireat the present moment to adopt conscription or to call out the militia.We have been summoned to reply to the appeal with which our sovereignthe Emperor has honored us. But to judge what is best--conscription orthe militia--we can leave to the supreme authority...."Pierre suddenly saw an outlet for his excitement. He hardened his heartagainst the senator who was introducing this set and narrow attitudeinto the deliberations of the nobility. Pierre stepped forward andinterrupted him. He himself did not yet know what he would say, but hebegan to speak eagerly, occasionally lapsing into French or expressinghimself in bookish Russian."Excuse me, your excellency," he began. (He was well acquainted with thesenator, but thought it necessary on this occasion to address himformally.) "Though I don't agree with the gentleman..." (he hesitated:he wished to say, "Mon tres honorable preopinant"--"My very honorableopponent") "with the gentleman... whom I have not the honor of knowing,I suppose that the nobility have been summoned not merely to expresstheir sympathy and enthusiasm but also to consider the means by which wecan assist our Fatherland! I imagine," he went on, warming to hissubject, "that the Emperor himself would not be satisfied to find in usmerely owners of serfs whom we are willing to devote to his service, andchair a canon * we are ready to make of ourselves--and not to obtainfrom us any co-co-counsel."* "Food for cannon."Many persons withdrew from the circle, noticing the senator's sarcasticsmile and the freedom of Pierre's remarks. Only Count Rostov was pleasedwith them as he had been pleased with those of the naval officer, thesenator, and in general with whatever speech he had last heard."I think that before discussing these questions," Pierre continued, "weshould ask the Emperor--most respectfully ask His Majesty--to let usknow the number of our troops and the position in which our army and ourforces now are, and then..."But scarcely had Pierre uttered these words before he was attacked fromthree sides. The most vigorous attack came from an old acquaintance, aboston player who had always been well disposed toward him, StepanStepanovich Adraksin. Adraksin was in uniform, and whether as a resultof the uniform or from some other cause Pierre saw before him quite adifferent man. With a sudden expression of malevolence on his aged face,Adraksin shouted at Pierre:"In the first place, I tell you we have no right to question the Emperorabout that, and secondly, if the Russian nobility had that right, theEmperor could not answer such a question. The troops are moved accordingto the enemy's movements and the number of men increases anddecreases..."Another voice, that of a nobleman of medium height and about forty yearsof age, whom Pierre had formerly met at the gypsies' and knew as a badcardplayer, and who, also transformed by his uniform, came up to Pierre,interrupted Adraksin."Yes, and this is not a time for discussing," he continued, "but foracting: there is war in Russia! The enemy is advancing to destroyRussia, to desecrate the tombs of our fathers, to carry off our wivesand children." The nobleman smote his breast. "We will all arise, everyone of us will go, for our father the Tsar!" he shouted, rolling hisbloodshot eyes. Several approving voices were heard in the crowd. "Weare Russians and will not grudge our blood in defense of our faith, thethrone, and the Fatherland! We must cease raving if we are sons of ourFatherland! We will show Europe how Russia rises to the defense ofRussia!"Pierre wished to reply, but could not get in a word. He felt that hiswords, apart from what meaning they conveyed, were less audible than thesound of his opponent's voice.Count Rostov at the back of the crowd was expressing approval; severalpersons, briskly turning a shoulder to the orator at the end of aphrase, said:"That's right, quite right! Just so!"Pierre wished to say that he was ready to sacrifice his money, hisserfs, or himself, only one ought to know the state of affairs in orderto be able to improve it, but he was unable to speak. Many voicesshouted and talked at the same time, so that Count Rostov had not timeto signify his approval of them all, and the group increased, dispersed,re-formed, and then moved with a hum of talk into the largest hall andto the big table. Not only was Pierre's attempt to speak unsuccessful,but he was rudely interrupted, pushed aside, and people turned away fromhim as from a common enemy. This happened not because they weredispleased by the substance of his speech, which had even been forgottenafter the many subsequent speeches, but to animate it the crowd needed atangible object to love and a tangible object to hate. Pierre became thelatter. Many other orators spoke after the excited nobleman, and all inthe same tone. Many spoke eloquently and with originality.Glinka, the editor of the Russian Messenger, who was recognized (criesof "author! author!" were heard in the crowd), said that "hell must berepulsed by hell," and that he had seen a child smiling at lightningflashes and thunderclaps, but "we will not be that child.""Yes, yes, at thunderclaps!" was repeated approvingly in the back rowsof the crowd.The crowd drew up to the large table, at which sat gray-haired or baldseventy-year-old magnates, uniformed and besashed almost all of whomPierre had seen in their own homes with their buffoons, or playingboston at the clubs. With an incessant hum of voices the crowd advancedto the table. Pressed by the throng against the high backs of thechairs, the orators spoke one after another and sometimes two together.Those standing behind noticed what a speaker omitted to say and hastenedto supply it. Others in that heat and crush racked their brains to findsome thought and hastened to utter it. The old magnates, whom Pierreknew, sat and turned to look first at one and then at another, and theirfaces for the most part only expressed the fact that they found it veryhot. Pierre, however, felt excited, and the general desire to show thatthey were ready to go to all lengths--which found expression in thetones and looks more than in the substance of the speeches--infected himtoo. He did not renounce his opinions, but felt himself in some way toblame and wished to justify himself."I only said that it would be more to the purpose to make sacrificeswhen we know what is needed!" said he, trying to be heard above theother voices.One of the old men nearest to him looked round, but his attention wasimmediately diverted by an exclamation at the other side of the table."Yes, Moscow will be surrendered! She will be our expiation!" shoutedone man."He is the enemy of mankind!" cried another. "Allow me to speak....""Gentlemen, you are crushing me!..."CHAPTER XXIIIAt that moment Count Rostopchin with his protruding chin and alert eyes,wearing the uniform of a general with sash over his shoulder, enteredthe room, stepping briskly to the front of the crowd of gentry."Our sovereign the Emperor will be here in a moment," said Rostopchin."I am straight from the palace. Seeing the position we are in, I thinkthere is little need for discussion. The Emperor has deigned to summonus and the merchants. Millions will pour forth from there"--he pointedto the merchants' hall--"but our business is to supply men and not spareourselves... That is the least we can do!"A conference took place confined to the magnates sitting at the table.The whole consultation passed more than quietly. After all the precedingnoise the sound of their old voices saying one after another, "I agree,"or for variety, "I too am of that opinion," and so on had even amournful effect.The secretary was told to write down the resolution of the Moscownobility and gentry, that they would furnish ten men, fully equipped,out of every thousand serfs, as the Smolensk gentry had done. Theirchairs made a scraping noise as the gentlemen who had conferred rosewith apparent relief, and began walking up and down, arm in arm, tostretch their legs and converse in couples."The Emperor! The Emperor!" a sudden cry resounded through the halls andthe whole throng hurried to the entrance.The Emperor entered the hall through a broad path between two lines ofnobles. Every face expressed respectful, awe-struck curiosity. Pierrestood rather far off and could not hear all that the Emperor said. Fromwhat he did hear he understood that the Emperor spoke of the dangerthreatening the empire and of the hopes he placed on the Moscownobility. He was answered by a voice which informed him of theresolution just arrived at."Gentlemen!" said the Emperor with a quivering voice.There was a rustling among the crowd and it again subsided, so thatPierre distinctly heard the pleasantly human voice of the Emperor sayingwith emotion:"I never doubted the devotion of the Russian nobles, but today it hassurpassed my expectations. I thank you in the name of the Fatherland!Gentlemen, let us act! Time is most precious..."The Emperor ceased speaking, the crowd began pressing round him, andrapturous exclamations were heard from all sides."Yes, most precious... a royal word," said Count Rostov, with a sob. Hestood at the back, and, though he had heard hardly anything, understoodeverything in his own way.From the hall of the nobility the Emperor went to that of the merchants.There he remained about ten minutes. Pierre was among those who saw himcome out from the merchants' hall with tears of emotion in his eyes. Asbecame known later, he had scarcely begun to address the merchantsbefore tears gushed from his eyes and he concluded in a trembling voice.When Pierre saw the Emperor he was coming out accompanied by twomerchants, one of whom Pierre knew, a fat otkupshchik. The other was themayor, a man with a thin sallow face and narrow beard. Both wereweeping. Tears filled the thin man's eyes, and the fat otkupshchiksobbed outright like a child and kept repeating:"Our lives and property--take them, Your Majesty!"Pierre's one feeling at the moment was a desire to show that he wasready to go all lengths and was prepared to sacrifice everything. He nowfelt ashamed of his speech with its constitutional tendency and soughtan opportunity of effacing it. Having heard that Count Mamonov wasfurnishing a regiment, Bezukhov at once informed Rostopchin that hewould give a thousand men and their maintenance.Old Rostov could not tell his wife of what had passed without tears, andat once consented to Petya's request and went himself to enter his name.Next day the Emperor left Moscow. The assembled nobles all took offtheir uniforms and settled down again in their homes and clubs, and notwithout some groans gave orders to their stewards about the enrollment,feeling amazed themselves at what they had done.BOOK TEN: 1812CHAPTER INapoleon began the war with Russia because he could not resist going toDresden, could not help having his head turned by the homage hereceived, could not help donning a Polish uniform and yielding to thestimulating influence of a June morning, and could not refrain frombursts of anger in the presence of Kurakin and then of Balashev.Alexander refused negotiations because he felt himself to be personallyinsulted. Barclay de Tolly tried to command the army in the best way,because he wished to fulfill his duty and earn fame as a greatcommander. Rostov charged the French because he could not restrain hiswish for a gallop across a level field; and in the same way theinnumerable people who took part in the war acted in accord with theirpersonal characteristics, habits, circumstances, and aims. They weremoved by fear or vanity, rejoiced or were indignant, reasoned, imaginingthat they knew what they were doing and did it of their own free will,but they all were involuntary tools of history, carrying on a workconcealed from them but comprehensible to us. Such is the inevitablefate of men of action, and the higher they stand in the social hierarchythe less are they free.The actors of 1812 have long since left the stage, their personalinterests have vanished leaving no trace, and nothing remains of thattime but its historic results.Providence compelled all these men, striving to attain personal aims, tofurther the accomplishment of a stupendous result no one of them at allexpected--neither Napoleon, nor Alexander, nor still less any of thosewho did the actual fighting.The cause of the destruction of the French army in 1812 is clear to usnow. No one will deny that that cause was, on the one hand, its advanceinto the heart of Russia late in the season without any preparation fora winter campaign and, on the other, the character given to the war bythe burning of Russian towns and the hatred of the foe this arousedamong the Russian people. But no one at the time foresaw (what now seemsso evident) that this was the only way an army of eight hundred thousandmen--the best in the world and led by the best general--could bedestroyed in conflict with a raw army of half its numerical strength,and led by inexperienced commanders as the Russian army was. Not onlydid no one see this, but on the Russian side every effort was made tohinder the only thing that could save Russia, while on the French side,despite Napoleon's experience and so-called military genius, everyeffort was directed to pushing on to Moscow at the end of the summer,that is, to doing the very thing that was bound to lead to destruction.In historical works on the year 1812 French writers are very fond ofsaying that Napoleon felt the danger of extending his line, that hesought a battle and that his marshals advised him to stop at Smolensk,and of making similar statements to show that the danger of the campaignwas even then understood. Russian authors are still fonder of telling usthat from the commencement of the campaign a Scythian war plan wasadopted to lure Napoleon into the depths of Russia, and this plan someof them attribute to Pfuel, others to a certain Frenchman, others toToll, and others again to Alexander himself--pointing to notes,projects, and letters which contain hints of such a line of action. Butall these hints at what happened, both from the French side and theRussian, are advanced only because they fit in with the event. Had thatevent not occurred these hints would have been forgotten, as we haveforgotten the thousands and millions of hints and expectations to thecontrary which were current then but have now been forgotten because theevent falsified them. There are always so many conjectures as to theissue of any event that however it may end there will always be peopleto say: "I said then that it would be so," quite forgetting that amidtheir innumerable conjectures many were to quite the contrary effect.Conjectures as to Napoleon's awareness of the danger of extending hisline, and (on the Russian side) as to luring the enemy into the depthsof Russia, are evidently of that kind, and only by much straining canhistorians attribute such conceptions to Napoleon and his marshals, orsuch plans to the Russian commanders. All the facts are in flatcontradiction to such conjectures. During the whole period of the warnot only was there no wish on the Russian side to draw the French intothe heart of the country, but from their first entry into Russiaeverything was done to stop them. And not only was Napoleon not afraidto extend his line, but he welcomed every step forward as a triumph anddid not seek battle as eagerly as in former campaigns, but very lazily.At the very beginning of the war our armies were divided, and our soleaim was to unite them, though uniting the armies was no advantage if wemeant to retire and lure the enemy into the depths of the country. OurEmperor joined the army to encourage it to defend every inch of Russiansoil and not to retreat. The enormous Drissa camp was formed on Pfuel'splan, and there was no intention of retiring farther. The Emperorreproached the commanders in chief for every step they retired. He couldnot bear the idea of letting the enemy even reach Smolensk, still lesscould he contemplate the burning of Moscow, and when our armies didunite he was displeased that Smolensk was abandoned and burned without ageneral engagement having been fought under its walls.So thought the Emperor, and the Russian commanders and people were stillmore provoked at the thought that our forces were retreating into thedepths of the country.Napoleon having cut our armies apart advanced far into the country andmissed several chances of forcing an engagement. In August he was atSmolensk and thought only of how to advance farther, though as we nowsee that advance was evidently ruinous to him.The facts clearly show that Napoleon did not foresee the danger of theadvance on Moscow, nor did Alexander and the Russian commanders thenthink of luring Napoleon on, but quite the contrary. The luring ofNapoleon into the depths of the country was not the result of any plan,for no one believed it to be possible; it resulted from a most complexinterplay of intrigues, aims, and wishes among those who took part inthe war and had no perception whatever of the inevitable, or of the oneway of saving Russia. Everything came about fortuitously. The armieswere divided at the commencement of the campaign. We tried to unitethem, with the evident intention of giving battle and checking theenemy's advance, and by this effort to unite them while avoiding battlewith a much stronger enemy, and necessarily withdrawing the armies at anacute angle--we led the French on to Smolensk. But we withdrew at anacute angle not only because the French advanced between our two armies;the angle became still more acute and we withdrew still farther, becauseBarclay de Tolly was an unpopular foreigner disliked by Bagration (whowould come under his command), and Bagration--being in command of thesecond army--tried to postpone joining up and coming under Barclay'scommand as long as he could. Bagration was slow in effecting thejunction--though that was the chief aim of all at headquarters--because,as he alleged, he exposed his army to danger on this march, and it wasbest for him to retire more to the left and more to the south, worryingthe enemy from flank and rear and securing from the Ukraine recruits forhis army; and it looks as if he planned this in order not to come underthe command of the detested foreigner Barclay, whose rank was inferiorto his own.The Emperor was with the army to encourage it, but his presence andignorance of what steps to take, and the enormous number of advisers andplans, destroyed the first army's energy and it retired.The intention was to make a stand at the Drissa camp, but Paulucci,aiming at becoming commander-in-chief, unexpectedly employed his energyto influence Alexander, and Pfuel's whole plan was abandoned and thecommand entrusted to Barclay. But as Barclay did not inspire confidencehis power was limited. The armies were divided, there was no unity ofcommand, and Barclay was unpopular; but from this confusion, division,and the unpopularity of the foreign commander-in-chief, there resultedon the one hand indecision and the avoidance of a battle (which we couldnot have refrained from had the armies been united and had someone else,instead of Barclay, been in command) and on the other an ever-increasingindignation against the foreigners and an increase in patriotic zeal.At last the Emperor left the army, and as the most convenient and indeedthe only pretext for his departure it was decided that it was necessaryfor him to inspire the people in the capitals and arouse the nation ingeneral to a patriotic war. And by this visit of the Emperor to Moscowthe strength of the Russian army was trebled.He left in order not to obstruct the commander-in-chief's undividedcontrol of the army, and hoping that more decisive action would then betaken, but the command of the armies became still more confused andenfeebled. Bennigsen, the Tsarevich, and a swarm of adjutants generalremained with the army to keep the commander-in-chief under observationand arouse his energy, and Barclay, feeling less free than ever underthe observation of all these "eyes of the Emperor," became still morecautious of undertaking any decisive action and avoided giving battle.Barclay stood for caution. The Tsarevich hinted at treachery anddemanded a general engagement. Lubomirski, Bronnitski, Wlocki, and theothers of that group stirred up so much trouble that Barclay, underpretext of sending papers to the Emperor, dispatched these Polishadjutants general to Petersburg and plunged into an open struggle withBennigsen and the Tsarevich.At Smolensk the armies at last reunited, much as Bagration disliked it.Bagration drove up in a carriage to the house occupied by Barclay.Barclay donned his sash and came out to meet and report to his seniorofficer Bagration.Despite his seniority in rank Bagration, in this contest of magnanimity,took his orders from Barclay, but, having submitted, agreed with himless than ever. By the Emperor's orders Bagration reported direct tohim. He wrote to Arakcheev, the Emperor's confidant: "It must be as mysovereign pleases, but I cannot work with the Minister (meaningBarclay). For God's sake send me somewhere else if only in command of aregiment. I cannot stand it here. Headquarters are so full of Germansthat a Russian cannot exist and there is no sense in anything. I thoughtI was really serving my sovereign and the Fatherland, but it turns outthat I am serving Barclay. I confess I do not want to."The swarm of Bronnitskis and Wintzingerodes and their like still furtherembittered the relations between the commanders in chief, and even lessunity resulted. Preparations were made to fight the French beforeSmolensk. A general was sent to survey the position. This general,hating Barclay, rode to visit a friend of his own, a corps commander,and, having spent the day with him, returned to Barclay and condemned,as unsuitable from every point of view, the battleground he had notseen.While disputes and intrigues were going on about the future field ofbattle, and while we were looking for the French--having lost touch withthem--the French stumbled upon Neverovski's division and reached thewalls of Smolensk.It was necessary to fight an unexpected battle at Smolensk to save ourlines of communication. The battle was fought and thousands were killedon both sides.Smolensk was abandoned contrary to the wishes of the Emperor and of thewhole people. But Smolensk was burned by its own inhabitants-who hadbeen misled by their governor. And these ruined inhabitants, setting anexample to other Russians, went to Moscow thinking only of their ownlosses but kindling hatred of the foe. Napoleon advanced farther and weretired, thus arriving at the very result which caused his destruction.CHAPTER IIThe day after his son had left, Prince Nicholas sent for Princess Maryto come to his study."Well? Are you satisfied now?" said he. "You've made me quarrel with myson! Satisfied, are you? That's all you wanted! Satisfied?... It hurtsme, it hurts. I'm old and weak and this is what you wanted. Well then,gloat over it! Gloat over it!"After that Princess Mary did not see her father for a whole week. He wasill and did not leave his study.Princess Mary noticed to her surprise that during this illness the oldprince not only excluded her from his room, but did not admitMademoiselle Bourienne either. Tikhon alone attended him.At the end of the week the prince reappeared and resumed his former wayof life, devoting himself with special activity to building operationsand the arrangement of the gardens and completely breaking off hisrelations with Mademoiselle Bourienne. His looks and cold tone to hisdaughter seemed to say: "There, you see? You plotted against me, youlied to Prince Andrew about my relations with that Frenchwoman and mademe quarrel with him, but you see I need neither her nor you!"Princess Mary spent half of every day with little Nicholas, watching hislessons, teaching him Russian and music herself, and talking toDessalles; the rest of the day she spent over her books, with her oldnurse, or with "God's folk" who sometimes came by the back door to seeher.Of the war Princess Mary thought as women do think about wars. Shefeared for her brother who was in it, was horrified by and amazed at thestrange cruelty that impels men to kill one another, but she did notunderstand the significance of this war, which seemed to her like allprevious wars. She did not realize the significance of this war, thoughDessalles with whom she constantly conversed was passionately interestedin its progress and tried to explain his own conception of it to her,and though the "God's folk" who came to see her reported, in their ownway, the rumors current among the people of an invasion by Antichrist,and though Julie (now Princess Drubetskaya), who had resumedcorrespondence with her, wrote patriotic letters from Moscow."I write you in Russian, my good friend," wrote Julie in her FrenchifiedRussian, "because I have a detestation for all the French, and the samefor their language which I cannot support to hear spoken.... We inMoscow are elated by enthusiasm for our adored Emperor."My poor husband is enduring pains and hunger in Jewish taverns, but thenews which I have inspires me yet more."You heard probably of the heroic exploit of Raevski, embracing his twosons and saying: 'I will perish with them but we will not be shaken!'And truly though the enemy was twice stronger than we, we wereunshakable. We pass the time as we can, but in war as in war! Theprincesses Aline and Sophie sit whole days with me, and we, unhappywidows of live men, make beautiful conversations over our 'charpie',only you, my friend, are missing..." and so on.The chief reason Princess Mary did not realize the full significance ofthis war was that the old prince never spoke of it, did not recognizeit, and laughed at Dessalles when he mentioned it at dinner. Theprince's tone was so calm and confident that Princess Maryunhesitatingly believed him.All that July the old prince was exceedingly active and even animated.He planned another garden and began a new building for the domesticserfs. The only thing that made Princess Mary anxious about him was thathe slept very little and, instead of sleeping in his study as usual,changed his sleeping place every day. One day he would order his campbed to be set up in the glass gallery, another day he remained on thecouch or on the lounge chair in the drawing room and dozed there withoutundressing, while--instead of Mademoiselle Bourienne--a serf boy read tohim. Then again he would spend a night in the dining room.On August 1, a second letter was received from Prince Andrew. In hisfirst letter which came soon after he had left home, Prince Andrew haddutifully asked his father's forgiveness for what he had allowed himselfto say and begged to be restored to his favor. To this letter the oldprince had replied affectionately, and from that time had kept theFrenchwoman at a distance. Prince Andrew's second letter, written nearVitebsk after the French had occupied that town, gave a brief account ofthe whole campaign, enclosed for them a plan he had drawn and forecastsas to the further progress of the war. In this letter Prince Andrewpointed out to his father the danger of staying at Bald Hills, so nearthe theater of war and on the army's direct line of march, and advisedhim to move to Moscow.At dinner that day, on Dessalles' mentioning that the French were saidto have already entered Vitebsk, the old prince remembered his son'sletter."There was a letter from Prince Andrew today," he said to Princess Mary--"Haven't you read it?""No, Father," she replied in a frightened voice.She could not have read the letter as she did not even know it hadarrived."He writes about this war," said the prince, with the ironic smile thathad become habitual to him in speaking of the present war."That must be very interesting," said Dessalles. "Prince Andrew is in aposition to know...""Oh, very interesting!" said Mademoiselle Bourienne."Go and get it for me," said the old prince to Mademoiselle Bourienne."You know--under the paperweight on the little table."Mademoiselle Bourienne jumped up eagerly."No, don't!" he exclaimed with a frown. "You go, Michael Ivanovich."Michael Ivanovich rose and went to the study. But as soon as he had leftthe room the old prince, looking uneasily round, threw down his napkinand went himself."They can't do anything... always make some muddle," he muttered.While he was away Princess Mary, Dessalles, Mademoiselle Bourienne, andeven little Nicholas exchanged looks in silence. The old prince returnedwith quick steps, accompanied by Michael Ivanovich, bringing the letterand a plan. These he put down beside him--not letting anyone read themat dinner.On moving to the drawing room he handed the letter to Princess Mary and,spreading out before him the plan of the new building and fixing hiseyes upon it, told her to read the letter aloud. When she had done soPrincess Mary looked inquiringly at her father. He was examining theplan, evidently engrossed in his own ideas."What do you think of it, Prince?" Dessalles ventured to ask."I? I?..." said the prince as if unpleasantly awakened, and not takinghis eyes from the plan of the building."Very possibly the theater of war will move so near to us that...""Ha ha ha! The theater of war!" said the prince. "I have said and stillsay that the theater of war is Poland and the enemy will never getbeyond the Niemen."Dessalles looked in amazement at the prince, who was talking of theNiemen when the enemy was already at the Dnieper, but Princess Mary,forgetting the geographical position of the Niemen, thought that whather father was saying was correct."When the snow melts they'll sink in the Polish swamps. Only they couldfail to see it," the prince continued, evidently thinking of thecampaign of 1807 which seemed to him so recent. "Bennigsen should haveadvanced into Prussia sooner, then things would have taken a differentturn...""But, Prince," Dessalles began timidly, "the letter mentionsVitebsk....""Ah, the letter? Yes..." replied the prince peevishly. "Yes... yes..."His face suddenly took on a morose expression. He paused. "Yes, hewrites that the French were beaten at... at... what river is it?"Dessalles dropped his eyes."The prince says nothing about that," he remarked gently."Doesn't he? But I didn't invent it myself."No one spoke for a long time."Yes... yes... Well, Michael Ivanovich," he suddenly went on, raisinghis head and pointing to the plan of the building, "tell me how you meanto alter it...."Michael Ivanovich went up to the plan, and the prince after speaking tohim about the building looked angrily at Princess Mary and Dessalles andwent to his own room.Princess Mary saw Dessalles' embarrassed and astonished look fixed onher father, noticed his silence, and was struck by the fact that herfather had forgotten his son's letter on the drawing-room table; but shewas not only afraid to speak of it and ask Dessalles the reason of hisconfusion and silence, but was afraid even to think about it.In the evening Michael Ivanovich, sent by the prince, came to PrincessMary for Prince Andrew's letter which had been forgotten in the drawingroom. She gave it to him and, unpleasant as it was to her to do so,ventured to ask him what her father was doing."Always busy," replied Michael Ivanovich with a respectfully ironicsmile which caused Princess Mary to turn pale. "He's worrying very muchabout the new building. He has been reading a little, but now"--MichaelIvanovich went on, lowering his voice--"now he's at his desk, busy withhis will, I expect." (One of the prince's favorite occupations of latehad been the preparation of some papers he meant to leave at his deathand which he called his "will.")"And Alpatych is being sent to Smolensk?" asked Princess Mary."Oh, yes, he has been waiting to start for some time."CHAPTER IIIWhen Michael Ivanovich returned to the study with the letter, the oldprince, with spectacles on and a shade over his eyes, was sitting at hisopen bureau with screened candles, holding a paper in his outstretchedhand, and in a somewhat dramatic attitude was reading his manuscript--his "Remarks" as he termed it--which was to be transmitted to theEmperor after his death.When Michael Ivanovich went in there were tears in the prince's eyesevoked by the memory of the time when the paper he was now reading hadbeen written. He took the letter from Michael Ivanovich's hand, put itin his pocket, folded up his papers, and called in Alpatych who had longbeen waiting.The prince had a list of things to be bought in Smolensk and, walking upand down the room past Alpatych who stood by the door, he gave hisinstructions."First, notepaper--do you hear? Eight quires, like this sample, gilt-edged... it must be exactly like the sample. Varnish, sealing wax, as inMichael Ivanovich's list."He paced up and down for a while and glanced at his notes."Then hand to the governor in person a letter about the deed."Next, bolts for the doors of the new building were wanted and had to beof a special shape the prince had himself designed, and a leather casehad to be ordered to keep the "will" in.The instructions to Alpatych took over two hours and still the princedid not let him go. He sat down, sank into thought, closed his eyes, anddozed off. Alpatych made a slight movement."Well, go, go! If anything more is wanted I'll send after you."Alpatych went out. The prince again went to his bureau, glanced into it,fingered his papers, closed the bureau again, and sat down at the tableto write to the governor.It was already late when he rose after sealing the letter. He wished tosleep, but he knew he would not be able to and that most depressingthoughts came to him in bed. So he called Tikhon and went through therooms with him to show him where to set up the bed for that night.He went about looking at every corner. Every place seemedunsatisfactory, but worst of all was his customary couch in the study.That couch was dreadful to him, probably because of the oppressivethoughts he had had when lying there. It was unsatisfactory everywhere,but the corner behind the piano in the sitting room was better thanother places: he had never slept there yet.With the help of a footman Tikhon brought in the bedstead and beganputting it up."That's not right! That's not right!" cried the prince, and himselfpushed it a few inches from the corner and then closer in again."Well, at last I've finished, now I'll rest," thought the prince, andlet Tikhon undress him.Frowning with vexation at the effort necessary to divest himself of hiscoat and trousers, the prince undressed, sat down heavily on the bed,and appeared to be meditating as he looked contemptuously at hiswithered yellow legs. He was not meditating, but only deferring themoment of making the effort to lift those legs up and turn over on thebed. "Ugh, how hard it is! Oh, that this toil might end and you wouldrelease me!" thought he. Pressing his lips together he made that effortfor the twenty-thousandth time and lay down. But hardly had he done sobefore he felt the bed rocking backwards and forwards beneath him as ifit were breathing heavily and jolting. This happened to him almost everynight. He opened his eyes as they were closing."No peace, damn them!" he muttered, angry he knew not with whom. "Ahyes, there was something else important, very important, that I waskeeping till I should be in bed. The bolts? No, I told him about them.No, it was something, something in the drawing room. Princess Marytalked some nonsense. Dessalles, that fool, said something. Something inmy pocket--can't remember...""Tikhon, what did we talk about at dinner?""About Prince Michael...""Be quiet, quiet!" The prince slapped his hand on the table. "Yes, Iknow, Prince Andrew's letter! Princess Mary read it. Dessalles saidsomething about Vitebsk. Now I'll read it."He had the letter taken from his pocket and the table--on which stood aglass of lemonade and a spiral wax candle--moved close to the bed, andputting on his spectacles he began reading. Only now in the stillness ofthe night, reading it by the faint light under the green shade, did hegrasp its meaning for a moment."The French at Vitebsk, in four days' march they may be at Smolensk;perhaps are already there! Tikhon!" Tikhon jumped up. "No, no, I don'twant anything!" he shouted.He put the letter under the candlestick and closed his eyes. And thererose before him the Danube at bright noonday: reeds, the Russian camp,and himself a young general without a wrinkle on his ruddy face,vigorous and alert, entering Potemkin's gaily colored tent, and aburning sense of jealousy of "the favorite" agitated him now as stronglyas it had done then. He recalled all the words spoken at that firstmeeting with Potemkin. And he saw before him a plump, rather sallow-faced, short, stout woman, the Empress Mother, with her smile and herwords at her first gracious reception of him, and then that same face onthe catafalque, and the encounter he had with Zubov over her coffinabout his right to kiss her hand."Oh, quicker, quicker! To get back to that time and have done with allthe present! Quicker, quicker--and that they should leave me in peace!"CHAPTER IVBald Hills, Prince Nicholas Bolkonski's estate, lay forty miles eastfrom Smolensk and two miles from the main road to Moscow.The same evening that the prince gave his instructions to Alpatych,Dessalles, having asked to see Princess Mary, told her that, as theprince was not very well and was taking no steps to secure his safety,though from Prince Andrew's letter it was evident that to remain at BaldHills might be dangerous, he respectfully advised her to send a letterby Alpatych to the Provincial Governor at Smolensk, asking him to lether know the state of affairs and the extent of the danger to which BaldHills was exposed. Dessalles wrote this letter to the Governor forPrincess Mary, she signed it, and it was given to Alpatych withinstructions to hand it to the Governor and to come back as quickly aspossible if there was danger.Having received all his orders Alpatych, wearing a white beaver hat--apresent from the prince--and carrying a stick as the prince did, wentout accompanied by his family. Three well-fed roans stood readyharnessed to a small conveyance with a leather hood.The larger bell was muffled and the little bells on the harness stuffedwith paper. The prince allowed no one at Bald Hills to drive withringing bells; but on a long journey Alpatych liked to have them. Hissatellites--the senior clerk, a countinghouse clerk, a scullery maid, acook, two old women, a little pageboy, the coachman, and variousdomestic serfs--were seeing him off.His daughter placed chintz-covered down cushions for him to sit on andbehind his back. His old sister-in-law popped in a small bundle, and oneof the coachmen helped him into the vehicle."There! There! Women's fuss! Women, women!" said Alpatych, puffing andspeaking rapidly just as the prince did, and he climbed into the trap.After giving the clerk orders about the work to be done, Alpatych, nottrying to imitate the prince now, lifted the hat from his bald head andcrossed himself three times."If there is anything... come back, Yakov Alpatych! For Christ's sakethink of us!" cried his wife, referring to the rumors of war and theenemy."Women, women! Women's fuss!" muttered Alpatych to himself and startedon his journey, looking round at the fields of yellow rye and the still-green, thickly growing oats, and at other quite black fields just beingplowed a second time.As he went along he looked with pleasure at the year's splendid crop ofcorn, scrutinized the strips of ryefield which here and there werealready being reaped, made his calculations as to the sowing and theharvest, and asked himself whether he had not forgotten any of theprince's orders.Having baited the horses twice on the way, he arrived at the town towardevening on the fourth of August.Alpatych kept meeting and overtaking baggage trains and troops on theroad. As he approached Smolensk he heard the sounds of distant firing,but these did not impress him. What struck him most was the sight of asplendid field of oats in which a camp had been pitched and which wasbeing mown down by the soldiers, evidently for fodder. This factimpressed Alpatych, but in thinking about his own business he soonforgot it.All the interests of his life for more than thirty years had beenbounded by the will of the prince, and he never went beyond that limit.Everything not connected with the execution of the prince's orders didnot interest and did not even exist for Alpatych.On reaching Smolensk on the evening of the fourth of August he put up inthe Gachina suburb across the Dnieper, at the inn kept by Ferapontov,where he had been in the habit of putting up for the last thirty years.Some thirty years ago Ferapontov, by Alpatych's advice, had bought awood from the prince, had begun to trade, and now had a house, an inn,and a corn dealer's shop in that province. He was a stout, dark, red-faced peasant in the forties, with thick lips, a broad knob of a nose,similar knobs over his black frowning brows, and a round belly.Wearing a waistcoat over his cotton shirt, Ferapontov was standingbefore his shop which opened onto the street. On seeing Alpatych he wentup to him."You're welcome, Yakov Alpatych. Folks are leaving the town, but youhave come to it," said he."Why are they leaving the town?" asked Alpatych."That's what I say. Folks are foolish! Always afraid of the French.""Women's fuss, women's fuss!" said Alpatych."Just what I think, Yakov Alpatych. What I say is: orders have beengiven not to let them in, so that must be right. And the peasants areasking three rubles for carting--it isn't Christian!"Yakov Alpatych heard without heeding. He asked for a samovar and for hayfor his horses, and when he had had his tea he went to bed.All night long troops were moving past the inn. Next morning Alpatychdonned a jacket he wore only in town and went out on business. It was asunny morning and by eight o'clock it was already hot. "A good day forharvesting," thought Alpatych.From beyond the town firing had been heard since early morning. At eighto'clock the booming of cannon was added to the sound of musketry. Manypeople were hurrying through the streets and there were many soldiers,but cabs were still driving about, tradesmen stood at their shops, andservice was being held in the churches as usual. Alpatych went to theshops, to government offices, to the post office, and to the Governor's.In the offices and shops and at the post office everyone was talkingabout the army and about the enemy who was already attacking the town,everybody was asking what should be done, and all were trying to calmone another.In front of the Governor's house Alpatych found a large number ofpeople, Cossacks, and a traveling carriage of the Governor's. At theporch he met two of the landed gentry, one of whom he knew. This man, anex-captain of police, was saying angrily:"It's no joke, you know! It's all very well if you're single. 'One manthough undone is but one,' as the proverb says, but with thirteen inyour family and all the property... They've brought us to utter ruin!What sort of governors are they to do that? They ought to be hanged--thebrigands!...""Oh come, that's enough!" said the other."What do I care? Let him hear! We're not dogs," said the ex-captain ofpolice, and looking round he noticed Alpatych."Oh, Yakov Alpatych! What have you come for?""To see the Governor by his excellency's order," answered Alpatych,lifting his head and proudly thrusting his hand into the bosom of hiscoat as he always did when he mentioned the prince.... "He has orderedme to inquire into the position of affairs," he added."Yes, go and find out!" shouted the angry gentleman. "They've broughtthings to such a pass that there are no carts or anything!... There itis again, do you hear?" said he, pointing in the direction whence camethe sounds of firing."They've brought us all to ruin... the brigands!" he repeated, anddescended the porch steps.Alpatych swayed his head and went upstairs. In the waiting room weretradesmen, women, and officials, looking silently at one another. Thedoor of the Governor's room opened and they all rose and moved forward.An official ran out, said some words to a merchant, called a stoutofficial with a cross hanging on his neck to follow him, and vanishedagain, evidently wishing to avoid the inquiring looks and questionsaddressed to him. Alpatych moved forward and next time the official cameout addressed him, one hand placed in the breast of his buttoned coat,and handed him two letters."To his Honor Baron Asch, from General-in-Chief Prince Bolkonski," heannounced with such solemnity and significance that the official turnedto him and took the letters.A few minutes later the Governor received Alpatych and hurriedly said tohim:"Inform the prince and princess that I knew nothing: I acted on thehighest instructions--here..." and he handed a paper to Alpatych."Still, as the prince is unwell my advice is that they should go toMoscow. I am just starting myself. Inform them..."But the Governor did not finish: a dusty perspiring officer ran into theroom and began to say something in French. The Governor's face expressedterror."Go," he said, nodding his head to Alpatych, and began questioning theofficer.Eager, frightened, helpless glances were turned on Alpatych when he cameout of the Governor's room. Involuntarily listening now to the firing,which had drawn nearer and was increasing in strength, Alpatych hurriedto his inn. The paper handed to him by the Governor said this:"I assure you that the town of Smolensk is not in the slightest dangeras yet and it is unlikely that it will be threatened with any. I fromthe one side and Prince Bagration from the other are marching to uniteour forces before Smolensk, which junction will be effected on the 22ndinstant, and both armies with their united forces will defend ourcompatriots of the province entrusted to your care till our effortsshall have beaten back the enemies of our Fatherland, or till the lastwarrior in our valiant ranks has perished. From this you will see thatyou have a perfect right to reassure the inhabitants of Smolensk, forthose defended by two such brave armies may feel assured of victory."(Instructions from Barclay de Tolly to Baron Asch, the civil governor ofSmolensk, 1812.)People were anxiously roaming about the streets.Carts piled high with household utensils, chairs, and cupboards keptemerging from the gates of the yards and moving along the streets.Loaded carts stood at the house next to Ferapontov's and women werewailing and lamenting as they said good-by. A small watchdog ran roundbarking in front of the harnessed horses.Alpatych entered the innyard at a quicker pace than usual and wentstraight to the shed where his horses and trap were. The coachman wasasleep. He woke him up, told him to harness, and went into the passage.From the host's room came the sounds of a child crying, the despairingsobs of a woman, and the hoarse angry shouting of Ferapontov. The cookbegan running hither and thither in the passage like a frightened hen,just as Alpatych entered."He's done her to death. Killed the mistress!... Beat her... dragged herabout so!...""What for?" asked Alpatych."She kept begging to go away. She's a woman! 'Take me away,' says she,'don't let me perish with my little children! Folks,' she says, 'are allgone, so why,' she says, 'don't we go?' And he began beating and pullingher about so!"At these words Alpatych nodded as if in approval, and not wishing tohear more went to the door of the room opposite the innkeeper's, wherehe had left his purchases."You brute, you murderer!" screamed a thin, pale woman who, with a babyin her arms and her kerchief torn from her head, burst through the doorat that moment and down the steps into the yard.Ferapontov came out after her, but on seeing Alpatych adjusted hiswaistcoat, smoothed his hair, yawned, and followed Alpatych into theopposite room."Going already?" said he.Alpatych, without answering or looking at his host, sorted his packagesand asked how much he owed."We'll reckon up! Well, have you been to the Governor's?" askedFerapontov. "What has been decided?"Alpatych replied that the Governor had not told him anything definite."With our business, how can we get away?" said Ferapontov. "We'd have topay seven rubles a cartload to Dorogobuzh and I tell them they're notChristians to ask it! Selivanov, now, did a good stroke last Thursday--sold flour to the army at nine rubles a sack. Will you have some tea?"he added.While the horses were being harnessed Alpatych and Ferapontov over theirtea talked of the price of corn, the crops, and the good weather forharvesting."Well, it seems to be getting quieter," remarked Ferapontov, finishinghis third cup of tea and getting up. "Ours must have got the best of it.The orders were not to let them in. So we're in force, it seems.... Theysay the other day Matthew Ivanych Platov drove them into the riverMarina and drowned some eighteen thousand in one day."Alpatych collected his parcels, handed them to the coachman who had comein, and settled up with the innkeeper. The noise of wheels, hoofs, andbells was heard from the gateway as a little trap passed out.It was by now late in the afternoon. Half the street was in shadow, theother half brightly lit by the sun. Alpatych looked out of the windowand went to the door. Suddenly the strange sound of a far-off whistlingand thud was heard, followed by a boom of cannon blending into a dullroar that set the windows rattling.He went out into the street: two men were running past toward thebridge. From different sides came whistling sounds and the thud ofcannon balls and bursting shells falling on the town. But these soundswere hardly heard in comparison with the noise of the firing outside thetown and attracted little attention from the inhabitants. The town wasbeing bombarded by a hundred and thirty guns which Napoleon had orderedup after four o'clock. The people did not at once realize the meaning ofthis bombardment.At first the noise of the falling bombs and shells only arousedcuriosity. Ferapontov's wife, who till then had not ceased wailing underthe shed, became quiet and with the baby in her arms went to the gate,listening to the sounds and looking in silence at the people.The cook and a shop assistant came to the gate. With lively curiosityeveryone tried to get a glimpse of the projectiles as they flew overtheir heads. Several people came round the corner talking eagerly."What force!" remarked one. "Knocked the roof and ceiling all tosplinters!""Routed up the earth like a pig," said another."That's grand, it bucks one up!" laughed the first. "Lucky you jumpedaside, or it would have wiped you out!"Others joined those men and stopped and told how cannon balls had fallenon a house close to them. Meanwhile still more projectiles, now with theswift sinister whistle of a cannon ball, now with the agreeableintermittent whistle of a shell, flew over people's heads incessantly,but not one fell close by, they all flew over. Alpatych was getting intohis trap. The innkeeper stood at the gate."What are you staring at?" he shouted to the cook, who in her red skirt,with sleeves rolled up, swinging her bare elbows, had stepped to thecorner to listen to what was being said."What marvels!" she exclaimed, but hearing her master's voice she turnedback, pulling down her tucked-up skirt.Once more something whistled, but this time quite close, swoopingdownwards like a little bird; a flame flashed in the middle of thestreet, something exploded, and the street was shrouded in smoke."Scoundrel, what are you doing?" shouted the innkeeper, rushing to thecook.At that moment the pitiful wailing of women was heard from differentsides, the frightened baby began to cry, and people crowded silentlywith pale faces round the cook. The loudest sound in that crowd was herwailing."Oh-h-h! Dear souls, dear kind souls! Don't let me die! My goodsouls!..."Five minutes later no one remained in the street. The cook, with herthigh broken by a shell splinter, had been carried into the kitchen.Alpatych, his coachman, Ferapontov's wife and children and the houseporter were all sitting in the cellar, listening. The roar of guns, thewhistling of projectiles, and the piteous moaning of the cook, whichrose above the other sounds, did not cease for a moment. The mistressrocked and hushed her baby and when anyone came into the cellar asked ina pathetic whisper what had become of her husband who had remained inthe street. A shopman who entered told her that her husband had gonewith others to the cathedral, whence they were fetching the wonder-working icon of Smolensk.Toward dusk the cannonade began to subside. Alpatych left the cellar andstopped in the doorway. The evening sky that had been so clear wasclouded with smoke, through which, high up, the sickle of the new moonshone strangely. Now that the terrible din of the guns had ceased a hushseemed to reign over the town, broken only by the rustle of footsteps,the moaning, the distant cries, and the crackle of fires which seemedwidespread everywhere. The cook's moans had now subsided. On two sidesblack curling clouds of smoke rose and spread from the fires. Throughthe streets soldiers in various uniforms walked or ran confusedly indifferent directions like ants from a ruined ant-hill. Several of themran into Ferapontov's yard before Alpatych's eyes. Alpatych went out tothe gate. A retreating regiment, thronging and hurrying, blocked thestreet.Noticing him, an officer said: "The town is being abandoned. Get away,get away!" and then, turning to the soldiers, shouted:"I'll teach you to run into the yards!"Alpatych went back to the house, called the coachman, and told him toset off. Ferapontov's whole household came out too, following Alpatychand the coachman. The women, who had been silent till then, suddenlybegan to wail as they looked at the fires--the smoke and even the flamesof which could be seen in the failing twilight--and as if in reply thesame kind of lamentation was heard from other parts of the street.Inside the shed Alpatych and the coachman arranged the tangled reins andtraces of their horses with trembling hands.As Alpatych was driving out of the gate he saw some ten soldiers inFerapontov's open shop, talking loudly and filling their bags andknapsacks with flour and sunflower seeds. Just then Ferapontov returnedand entered his shop. On seeing the soldiers he was about to shout atthem, but suddenly stopped and, clutching at his hair, burst into sobsand laughter:"Loot everything, lads! Don't let those devils get it!" he cried, takingsome bags of flour himself and throwing them into the street.Some of the soldiers were frightened and ran away, others went onfilling their bags. On seeing Alpatych, Ferapontov turned to him:"Russia is done for!" he cried. "Alpatych, I'll set the place on firemyself. We're done for!..." and Ferapontov ran into the yard.Soldiers were passing in a constant stream along the street blocking itcompletely, so that Alpatych could not pass out and had to wait.Ferapontov's wife and children were also sitting in a cart waiting tillit was possible to drive out.Night had come. There were stars in the sky and the new moon shone outamid the smoke that screened it. On the sloping descent to the DnieperAlpatych's cart and that of the innkeeper's wife, which were slowlymoving amid the rows of soldiers and of other vehicles, had to stop. Ina side street near the crossroads where the vehicles had stopped, ahouse and some shops were on fire. This fire was already burning itselfout. The flames now died down and were lost in the black smoke, nowsuddenly flared up again brightly, lighting up with strange distinctnessthe faces of the people crowding at the crossroads. Black figuresflitted about before the fire, and through the incessant crackling ofthe flames talking and shouting could be heard. Seeing that his trapwould not be able to move on for some time, Alpatych got down and turnedinto the side street to look at the fire. Soldiers were continuallyrushing backwards and forwards near it, and he saw two of them and a manin a frieze coat dragging burning beams into another yard across thestreet, while others carried bundles of hay.Alpatych went up to a large crowd standing before a high barn which wasblazing briskly. The walls were all on fire and the back wall had fallenin, the wooden roof was collapsing, and the rafters were alight. Thecrowd was evidently watching for the roof to fall in, and Alpatychwatched for it too."Alpatych!" a familiar voice suddenly hailed the old man."Mercy on us! Your excellency!" answered Alpatych, immediatelyrecognizing the voice of his young prince.Prince Andrew in his riding cloak, mounted on a black horse, was lookingat Alpatych from the back of the crowd."Why are you here?" he asked."Your... your excellency," stammered Alpatych and broke into sobs. "Arewe really lost? Master!...""Why are you here?" Prince Andrew repeated.At that moment the flames flared up and showed his young master's paleworn face. Alpatych told how he had been sent there and how difficult itwas to get away."Are we really quite lost, your excellency?" he asked again.Prince Andrew without replying took out a notebook and raising his kneebegan writing in pencil on a page he tore out. He wrote to his sister:"Smolensk is being abandoned. Bald Hills will be occupied by the enemywithin a week. Set off immediately for Moscow. Let me know at once whenyou will start. Send by special messenger to Usvyazh."Having written this and given the paper to Alpatych, he told him how toarrange for departure of the prince, the princess, his son, and theboy's tutor, and how and where to let him know immediately. Before hehad had time to finish giving these instructions, a chief of stafffollowed by a suite galloped up to him."You are a colonel?" shouted the chief of staff with a German accent, ina voice familiar to Prince Andrew. "Houses are set on fire in yourpresence and you stand by! What does this mean? You will answer for it!"shouted Berg, who was now assistant to the chief of staff of thecommander of the left flank of the infantry of the first army, a place,as Berg said, "very agreeable and well en evidence."Prince Andrew looked at him and without replying went on speaking toAlpatych."So tell them that I shall await a reply till the tenth, and if by thetenth I don't receive news that they have all got away I shall have tothrow up everything and come myself to Bald Hills.""Prince," said Berg, recognizing Prince Andrew, "I only spoke because Ihave to obey orders, because I always do obey exactly.... You mustplease excuse me," he went on apologetically.Something cracked in the flames. The fire died down for a moment andwreaths of black smoke rolled from under the roof. There was anotherterrible crash and something huge collapsed."Ou-rou-rou!" yelled the crowd, echoing the crash of the collapsing roofof the barn, the burning grain in which diffused a cakelike aroma allaround. The flames flared up again, lighting the animated, delighted,exhausted faces of the spectators.The man in the frieze coat raised his arms and shouted:"It's fine, lads! Now it's raging... It's fine!""That's the owner himself," cried several voices."Well then," continued Prince Andrew to Alpatych, "report to them as Ihave told you"; and not replying a word to Berg who was now mute besidehim, he touched his horse and rode down the side street.CHAPTER VFrom Smolensk the troops continued to retreat, followed by the enemy. Onthe tenth of August the regiment Prince Andrew commanded was marchingalong the highroad past the avenue leading to Bald Hills. Heat anddrought had continued for more than three weeks. Each day fleecy cloudsfloated across the sky and occasionally veiled the sun, but towardevening the sky cleared again and the sun set in reddish-brown mist.Heavy night dews alone refreshed the earth. The unreaped corn wasscorched and shed its grain. The marshes dried up. The cattle lowed fromhunger, finding no food on the sun-parched meadows. Only at night and inthe forests while the dew lasted was there any freshness. But on theroad, the highroad along which the troops marched, there was no suchfreshness even at night or when the road passed through the forest; thedew was imperceptible on the sandy dust churned up more than six inchesdeep. As soon as day dawned the march began. The artillery and baggagewagons moved noiselessly through the deep dust that rose to the veryhubs of the wheels, and the infantry sank ankle-deep in that soft,choking, hot dust that never cooled even at night. Some of this dust waskneaded by the feet and wheels, while the rest rose and hung like acloud over the troops, settling in eyes, ears, hair, and nostrils, andworst of all in the lungs of the men and beasts as they moved along thatroad. The higher the sun rose the higher rose that cloud of dust, andthrough the screen of its hot fine particles one could look with nakedeye at the sun, which showed like a huge crimson ball in the uncloudedsky. There was no wind, and the men choked in that motionlessatmosphere. They marched with handkerchiefs tied over their noses andmouths. When they passed through a village they all rushed to the wellsand fought for the water and drank it down to the mud.Prince Andrew was in command of a regiment, and the management of thatregiment, the welfare of the men and the necessity of receiving andgiving orders, engrossed him. The burning of Smolensk and itsabandonment made an epoch in his life. A novel feeling of anger againstthe foe made him forget his own sorrow. He was entirely devoted to theaffairs of his regiment and was considerate and kind to his men andofficers. In the regiment they called him "our prince," were proud ofhim and loved him. But he was kind and gentle only to those of hisregiment, to Timokhin and the like--people quite new to him, belongingto a different world and who could not know and understand his past. Assoon as he came across a former acquaintance or anyone from the staff,he bristled up immediately and grew spiteful, ironical, andcontemptuous. Everything that reminded him of his past was repugnant tohim, and so in his relations with that former circle he confined himselfto trying to do his duty and not to be unfair.In truth everything presented itself in a dark and gloomy light toPrince Andrew, especially after the abandonment of Smolensk on the sixthof August (he considered that it could and should have been defended)and after his sick father had had to flee to Moscow, abandoning topillage his dearly beloved Bald Hills which he had built and peopled.But despite this, thanks to his regiment, Prince Andrew had something tothink about entirely apart from general questions. Two days previouslyhe had received news that his father, son, and sister had left forMoscow; and though there was nothing for him to do at Bald Hills, PrinceAndrew with a characteristic desire to foment his own grief decided thathe must ride there.He ordered his horse to be saddled and, leaving his regiment on themarch, rode to his father's estate where he had been born and spent hischildhood. Riding past the pond where there used always to be dozens ofwomen chattering as they rinsed their linen or beat it with woodenbeetles, Prince Andrew noticed that there was not a soul about and thatthe little washing wharf, torn from its place and half submerged, wasfloating on its side in the middle of the pond. He rode to the keeper'slodge. No one at the stone entrance gates of the drive and the doorstood open. Grass had already begun to grow on the garden paths, andhorses and calves were straying in the English park. Prince Andrew rodeup to the hothouse; some of the glass panes were broken, and of thetrees in tubs some were overturned and others dried up. He called forTaras the gardener, but no one replied. Having gone round the corner ofthe hothouse to the ornamental garden, he saw that the carved gardenfence was broken and branches of the plum trees had been torn off withthe fruit. An old peasant whom Prince Andrew in his childhood had oftenseen at the gate was sitting on a green garden seat, plaiting a bastshoe.He was deaf and did not hear Prince Andrew ride up. He was sitting onthe seat the old prince used to like to sit on, and beside him strips ofbast were hanging on the broken and withered branch of a magnolia.Prince Andrew rode up to the house. Several limes in the old garden hadbeen cut down and a piebald mare and her foal were wandering in front ofthe house among the rosebushes. The shutters were all closed, except atone window which was open. A little serf boy, seeing Prince Andrew, raninto the house. Alpatych, having sent his family away, was alone at BaldHills and was sitting indoors reading the Lives of the Saints. Onhearing that Prince Andrew had come, he went out with his spectacles onhis nose, buttoning his coat, and, hastily stepping up, without a wordbegan weeping and kissing Prince Andrew's knee.Then, vexed at his own weakness, he turned away and began to report onthe position of affairs. Everything precious and valuable had beenremoved to Bogucharovo. Seventy quarters of grain had also been cartedaway. The hay and the spring corn, of which Alpatych said there had beena remarkable crop that year, had been commandeered by the troops andmown down while still green. The peasants were ruined; some of them toohad gone to Bogucharovo, only a few remained.Without waiting to hear him out, Prince Andrew asked:"When did my father and sister leave?" meaning when did they leave forMoscow.Alpatych, understanding the question to refer to their departure forBogucharovo, replied that they had left on the seventh and again wentinto details concerning the estate management, asking for instructions."Am I to let the troops have the oats, and to take a receipt for them?We have still six hundred quarters left," he inquired."What am I to say to him?" thought Prince Andrew, looking down on theold man's bald head shining in the sun and seeing by the expression onhis face that the old man himself understood how untimely such questionswere and only asked them to allay his grief."Yes, let them have it," replied Prince Andrew."If you noticed some disorder in the garden," said Alpatych, "it wasimpossible to prevent it. Three regiments have been here and spent thenight, dragoons mostly. I took down the name and rank of theircommanding officer, to hand in a complaint about it.""Well, and what are you going to do? Will you stay here if the enemyoccupies the place?" asked Prince Andrew.Alpatych turned his face to Prince Andrew, looked at him, and suddenlywith a solemn gesture raised his arm."He is my refuge! His will be done!" he exclaimed.A group of bareheaded peasants was approaching across the meadow towardthe prince."Well, good-by!" said Prince Andrew, bending over to Alpatych. "You mustgo away too, take away what you can and tell the serfs to go to theRyazan estate or to the one near Moscow."Alpatych clung to Prince Andrew's leg and burst into sobs. Gentlydisengaging himself, the prince spurred his horse and rode down theavenue at a gallop.The old man was still sitting in the ornamental garden, like a flyimpassive on the face of a loved one who is dead, tapping the last onwhich he was making the bast shoe, and two little girls, running outfrom the hot house carrying in their skirts plums they had plucked fromthe trees there, came upon Prince Andrew. On seeing the young master,the elder one with frightened look clutched her younger companion by thehand and hid with her behind a birch tree, not stopping to pick up somegreen plums they had dropped.Prince Andrew turned away with startled haste, unwilling to let them seethat they had been observed. He was sorry for the pretty frightenedlittle girl, was afraid of looking at her, and yet felt an irresistibledesire to do so. A new sensation of comfort and relief came over himwhen, seeing these girls, he realized the existence of other humaninterests entirely aloof from his own and just as legitimate as thosethat occupied him. Evidently these girls passionately desired one thing--to carry away and eat those green plums without being caught--andPrince Andrew shared their wish for the success of their enterprise. Hecould not resist looking at them once more. Believing their danger past,they sprang from their ambush and, chirruping something in their shrilllittle voices and holding up their skirts, their bare little sunburnedfeet scampered merrily and quickly across the meadow grass.Prince Andrew was somewhat refreshed by having ridden off the dustyhighroad along which the troops were moving. But not far from Bald Hillshe again came out on the road and overtook his regiment at its haltingplace by the dam of a small pond. It was past one o'clock. The sun, ared ball through the dust, burned and scorched his back intolerablythrough his black coat. The dust always hung motionless above the buzzof talk that came from the resting troops. There was no wind. As hecrossed the dam Prince Andrew smelled the ooze and freshness of thepond. He longed to get into that water, however dirty it might be, andhe glanced round at the pool from whence came sounds of shrieks andlaughter. The small, muddy, green pond had risen visibly more than afoot, flooding the dam, because it was full of the naked white bodies ofsoldiers with brick-red hands, necks, and faces, who were splashingabout in it. All this naked white human flesh, laughing and shrieking,floundered about in that dirty pool like carp stuffed into a wateringcan, and the suggestion of merriment in that floundering mass renderedit specially pathetic.One fair-haired young soldier of the third company, whom Prince Andrewknew and who had a strap round the calf of one leg, crossed himself,stepped back to get a good run, and plunged into the water; another, adark noncommissioned officer who was always shaggy, stood up to hiswaist in the water joyfully wriggling his muscular figure and snortedwith satisfaction as he poured the water over his head with handsblackened to the wrists. There were sounds of men slapping one another,yelling, and puffing.Everywhere on the bank, on the dam, and in the pond, there was healthy,white, muscular flesh. The officer, Timokhin, with his red little nose,standing on the dam wiping himself with a towel, felt confused at seeingthe prince, but made up his mind to address him nevertheless."It's very nice, your excellency! Wouldn't you like to?" said he."It's dirty," replied Prince Andrew, making a grimace."We'll clear it out for you in a minute," said Timokhin, and, stillundressed, ran off to clear the men out of the pond."The prince wants to bathe.""What prince? Ours?" said many voices, and the men were in such haste toclear out that the prince could hardly stop them. He decided that hewould rather wash himself with water in the barn."Flesh, bodies, cannon fodder!" he thought, and he looked at his ownnaked body and shuddered, not from cold but from a sense of disgust andhorror he did not himself understand, aroused by the sight of thatimmense number of bodies splashing about in the dirty pond.On the seventh of August Prince Bagration wrote as follows from hisquarters at Mikhaylovna on the Smolensk road:Dear Count Alexis Andreevich--(He was writing to Arakcheev but knew thathis letter would be read by the Emperor, and therefore weighed everyword in it to the best of his ability.)I expect the Minister (Barclay de Tolly) has already reported theabandonment of Smolensk to the enemy. It is pitiable and sad, and thewhole army is in despair that this most important place has beenwantonly abandoned. I, for my part, begged him personally most urgentlyand finally wrote him, but nothing would induce him to consent. I swearto you on my honor that Napoleon was in such a fix as never before andmight have lost half his army but could not have taken Smolensk. Ourtroops fought, and are fighting, as never before. With fifteen thousandmen I held the enemy at bay for thirty-five hours and beat him; but hewould not hold out even for fourteen hours. It is disgraceful, a stainon our army, and as for him, he ought, it seems to me, not to live. Ifhe reports that our losses were great, it is not true; perhaps aboutfour thousand, not more, and not even that; but even were they tenthousand, that's war! But the enemy has lost masses...What would it have cost him to hold out for another two days? They wouldhave had to retire of their own accord, for they had no water for men orhorses. He gave me his word he would not retreat, but suddenly sentinstructions that he was retiring that night. We cannot fight in thisway, or we may soon bring the enemy to Moscow...There is a rumor that you are thinking of peace. God forbid that youshould make peace after all our sacrifices and such insane retreats! Youwould set all Russia against you and every one of us would feel ashamedto wear the uniform. If it has come to this--we must fight as long asRussia can and as long as there are men able to stand...One man ought to be in command, and not two. Your Minister may perhapsbe good as a Minister, but as a general he is not merely bad butexecrable, yet to him is entrusted the fate of our whole country.... Iam really frantic with vexation; forgive my writing boldly. It is clearthat the man who advocates the conclusion of a peace, and that theMinister should command the army, does not love our sovereign anddesires the ruin of us all. So I write you frankly: call out themilitia. For the Minister is leading these visitors after him to Moscowin a most masterly way. The whole army feels great suspicion of theImperial aide-de-camp Wolzogen. He is said to be more Napoleon's manthan ours, and he is always advising the Minister. I am not merely civilto him but obey him like a corporal, though I am his senior. This ispainful, but, loving my benefactor and sovereign, I submit. Only I amsorry for the Emperor that he entrusts our fine army to such as he.Consider that on our retreat we have lost by fatigue and left in thehospital more than fifteen thousand men, and had we attacked this wouldnot have happened. Tell me, for God's sake, what will Russia, our motherRussia, say to our being so frightened, and why are we abandoning ourgood and gallant Fatherland to such rabble and implanting feelings ofhatred and shame in all our subjects? What are we scared at and of whomare we afraid? I am not to blame that the Minister is vacillating, acoward, dense, dilatory, and has all bad qualities. The whole armybewails it and calls down curses upon him...CHAPTER VIAmong the innumerable categories applicable to the phenomena of humanlife one may discriminate between those in which substance prevails andthose in which form prevails. To the latter--as distinguished fromvillage, country, provincial, or even Moscow life--we may allotPetersburg life, and especially the life of its salons. That life of thesalons is unchanging. Since the year 1805 we had made peace and hadagain quarreled with Bonaparte and had made constitutions and unmadethem again, but the salons of Anna Pavlovna and Helene remained just asthey had been--the one seven and the other five years before. At AnnaPavlovna's they talked with perplexity of Bonaparte's successes just asbefore and saw in them and in the subservience shown to him by theEuropean sovereigns a malicious conspiracy, the sole object of which wasto cause unpleasantness and anxiety to the court circle of which AnnaPavlovna was the representative. And in Helene's salon, which Rumyantsevhimself honored with his visits, regarding Helene as a remarkablyintelligent woman, they talked with the same ecstasy in 1812 as in 1808of the "great nation" and the "great man," and regretted our rupturewith France, a rupture which, according to them, ought to be promptlyterminated by peace.Of late, since the Emperor's return from the army, there had been someexcitement in these conflicting salon circles and some demonstrations ofhostility to one another, but each camp retained its own tendency. InAnna Pavlovna's circle only those Frenchmen were admitted who were deep-rooted legitimists, and patriotic views were expressed to the effectthat one ought not to go to the French theater and that to maintain theFrench troupe was costing the government as much as a whole army corps.The progress of the war was eagerly followed, and only the reports mostflattering to our army were circulated. In the French circle of Heleneand Rumyantsev the reports of the cruelty of the enemy and of the warwere contradicted and all Napoleon's attempts at conciliation werediscussed. In that circle they discountenanced those who advised hurriedpreparations for a removal to Kazan of the court and the girls'educational establishments under the patronage of the Dowager Empress.In Helene's circle the war in general was regarded as a series of formaldemonstrations which would very soon end in peace, and the viewprevailed expressed by Bilibin--who now in Petersburg was quite at homein Helene's house, which every clever man was obliged to visit--that notby gunpowder but by those who invented it would matters be settled. Inthat circle the Moscow enthusiasm--news of which had reached Petersburgsimultaneously with the Emperor's return--was ridiculed sarcasticallyand very cleverly, though with much caution.Anna Pavlovna's circle on the contrary was enraptured by this enthusiasmand spoke of it as Plutarch speaks of the deeds of the ancients. PrinceVasili, who still occupied his former important posts, formed aconnecting link between these two circles. He visited his "good friendAnna Pavlovna" as well as his daughter's "diplomatic salon," and oftenin his constant comings and goings between the two camps became confusedand said at Helene's what he should have said at Anna Pavlovna's andvice versa.Soon after the Emperor's return Prince Vasili in a conversation aboutthe war at Anna Pavlovna's severely condemned Barclay de Tolly, but wasundecided as to who ought to be appointed commander-in-chief. One of thevisitors, usually spoken of as "a man of great merit," having describedhow he had that day seen Kutuzov, the newly chosen chief of thePetersburg militia, presiding over the enrollment of recruits at theTreasury, cautiously ventured to suggest that Kutuzov would be the manto satisfy all requirements.Anna Pavlovna remarked with a melancholy smile that Kutuzov had donenothing but cause the Emperor annoyance."I have talked and talked at the Assembly of the Nobility," PrinceVasili interrupted, "but they did not listen to me. I told them hiselection as chief of the militia would not please the Emperor. They didnot listen to me."It's all this mania for opposition," he went on. "And who for? It isall because we want to ape the foolish enthusiasm of those Muscovites,"Prince Vasili continued, forgetting for a moment that though at Helene'sone had to ridicule the Moscow enthusiasm, at Anna Pavlovna's one had tobe ecstatic about it. But he retrieved his mistake at once. "Now, is itsuitable that Count Kutuzov, the oldest general in Russia, shouldpreside at that tribunal? He will get nothing for his pains! How couldthey make a man commander-in-chief who cannot mount a horse, who dropsasleep at a council, and has the very worst morals! A good reputation hemade for himself at Bucharest! I don't speak of his capacity as ageneral, but at a time like this how they appoint a decrepit, blind oldman, positively blind? A fine idea to have a blind general! He can't seeanything. To play blindman's bluff? He can't see at all!"No one replied to his remarks.This was quite correct on the twenty-fourth of July. But on the twenty-ninth of July Kutuzov received the title of Prince. This might indicatea wish to get rid of him, and therefore Prince Vasili's opinioncontinued to be correct though he was not now in any hurry to expressit. But on the eighth of August a committee, consisting of Field MarshalSaltykov, Arakcheev, Vyazmitinov, Lopukhin, and Kochubey met to considerthe progress of the war. This committee came to the conclusion that ourfailures were due to a want of unity in the command and though themembers of the committee were aware of the Emperor's dislike of Kutuzov,after a short deliberation they agreed to advise his appointment ascommander in chief. That same day Kutuzov was appointed commander-in-chief with full powers over the armies and over the whole regionoccupied by them.On the ninth of August Prince Vasili at Anna Pavlovna's again met the"man of great merit." The latter was very attentive to Anna Pavlovnabecause he wanted to be appointed director of one of the educationalestablishments for young ladies. Prince Vasili entered the room with theair of a happy conqueror who has attained the object of his desires."Well, have you heard the great news? Prince Kutuzov is field marshal!All dissensions are at an end! I am so glad, so delighted! At last wehave a man!" said he, glancing sternly and significantly round ateveryone in the drawing room.The "man of great merit," despite his desire to obtain the post ofdirector, could not refrain from reminding Prince Vasili of his formeropinion. Though this was impolite to Prince Vasili in Anna Pavlovna'sdrawing room, and also to Anna Pavlovna herself who had received thenews with delight, he could not resist the temptation."But, Prince, they say he is blind!" said he, reminding Prince Vasili ofhis own words."Eh? Nonsense! He sees well enough," said Prince Vasili rapidly, in adeep voice and with a slight cough--the voice and cough with which hewas wont to dispose of all difficulties."He sees well enough," he added. "And what I am so pleased about," hewent on, "is that our sovereign has given him full powers over all thearmies and the whole region--powers no commander-in-chief ever hadbefore. He is a second autocrat," he concluded with a victorious smile."God grant it! God grant it!" said Anna Pavlovna.The "man of great merit," who was still a novice in court circles,wishing to flatter Anna Pavlovna by defending her former position onthis question, observed:"It is said that the Emperor was reluctant to give Kutuzov those powers.They say he blushed like a girl to whom Joconde is read, when he said toKutuzov: 'Your Emperor and the Fatherland award you this honor.'""Perhaps the heart took no part in that speech," said Anna Pavlovna."Oh, no, no!" warmly rejoined Prince Vasili, who would not now yieldKutuzov to anyone; in his opinion Kutuzov was not only admirablehimself, but was adored by everybody. "No, that's impossible," said he,"for our sovereign appreciated him so highly before.""God grant only that Prince Kutuzov assumes real power and does notallow anyone to put a spoke in his wheel," observed Anna Pavlovna.Understanding at once to whom she alluded, Prince Vasili said in awhisper:"I know for a fact that Kutuzov made it an absolute condition that theTsarevich should not be with the army. Do you know what he said to theEmperor?"And Prince Vasili repeated the words supposed to have been spoken byKutuzov to the Emperor. "I can neither punish him if he does wrong norreward him if he does right.""Oh, a very wise man is Prince Kutuzov! I have known him a long time!""They even say," remarked the "man of great merit" who did not yetpossess courtly tact, "that his excellency made it an express conditionthat the sovereign himself should not be with the army."As soon as he said this both Prince Vasili and Anna Pavlovna turned awayfrom him and glanced sadly at one another with a sigh at his naivete.CHAPTER VIIWhile this was taking place in Petersburg the French had already passedSmolensk and were drawing nearer and nearer to Moscow. Napoleon'shistorian Thiers, like other of his historians, trying to justify hishero says that he was drawn to the walls of Moscow against his will. Heis as right as other historians who look for the explanation of historicevents in the will of one man; he is as right as the Russian historianswho maintain that Napoleon was drawn to Moscow by the skill of theRussian commanders. Here besides the law of retrospection, which regardsall the past as a preparation for events that subsequently occur, thelaw of reciprocity comes in, confusing the whole matter. A goodchessplayer having lost a game is sincerely convinced that his lossresulted from a mistake he made and looks for that mistake in theopening, but forgets that at each stage of the game there were similarmistakes and that none of his moves were perfect. He only notices themistake to which he pays attention, because his opponent took advantageof it. How much more complex than this is the game of war, which occursunder certain limits of time, and where it is not one will thatmanipulates lifeless objects, but everything results from innumerableconflicts of various wills!After Smolensk Napoleon sought a battle beyond Dorogobuzh at Vyazma, andthen at Tsarevo-Zaymishche, but it happened that owing to a conjunctionof innumerable circumstances the Russians could not give battle tillthey reached Borodino, seventy miles from Moscow. From Vyazma Napoleonordered a direct advance on Moscow.Moscou, la capitale asiatique de ce grand empire, la ville sacree despeuples d'Alexandre, Moscou avec ses innombrables eglises en forme depagodes chinoises, * this Moscow gave Napoleon's imagination no rest. Onthe march from Vyazma to Tsarevo-Zaymishche he rode his light baybobtailed ambler accompanied by his Guards, his bodyguard, his pages,and aides-de-camp. Berthier, his chief of staff, dropped behind toquestion a Russian prisoner captured by the cavalry. Followed byLelorgne d'Ideville, an interpreter, he overtook Napoleon at a gallopand reined in his horse with an amused expression.* "Moscow, the Asiatic capital of this great empire, the sacred city ofAlexander's people, Moscow with its innumerable churches shaped likeChinese pagodas.""Well?" asked Napoleon."One of Platov's Cossacks says that Platov's corps is joining up withthe main army and that Kutuzov has been appointed commander-in-chief. Heis a very shrewd and garrulous fellow."Napoleon smiled and told them to give the Cossack a horse and bring theman to him. He wished to talk to him himself. Several adjutants gallopedoff, and an hour later, Lavrushka, the serf Denisov had handed over toRostov, rode up to Napoleon in an orderly's jacket and on a Frenchcavalry saddle, with a merry, and tipsy face. Napoleon told him to rideby his side and began questioning him."You are a Cossack?""Yes, a Cossack, your Honor.""The Cossack, not knowing in what company he was, for Napoleon's plainappearance had nothing about it that would reveal to an Oriental mindthe presence of a monarch, talked with extreme familiarity of theincidents of the war," says Thiers, narrating this episode. In realityLavrushka, having got drunk the day before and left his masterdinnerless, had been whipped and sent to the village in quest ofchickens, where he engaged in looting till the French took him prisoner.Lavrushka was one of those coarse, bare-faced lackeys who have seen allsorts of things, consider it necessary to do everything in a mean andcunning way, are ready to render any sort of service to their master,and are keen at guessing their master's baser impulses, especially thoseprompted by vanity and pettiness.Finding himself in the company of Napoleon, whose identity he had easilyand surely recognized, Lavrushka was not in the least abashed but merelydid his utmost to gain his new master's favor.He knew very well that this was Napoleon, but Napoleon's presence couldno more intimidate him than Rostov's, or a sergeant major's with therods, would have done, for he had nothing that either the sergeant majoror Napoleon could deprive him of.So he rattled on, telling all the gossip he had heard among theorderlies. Much of it true. But when Napoleon asked him whether theRussians thought they would beat Bonaparte or not, Lavrushka screwed uphis eyes and considered.In this question he saw subtle cunning, as men of his type see cunningin everything, so he frowned and did not answer immediately."It's like this," he said thoughtfully, "if there's a battle soon, yourswill win. That's right. But if three days pass, then after that, well,then that same battle will not soon be over."Lelorgne d'Ideville smilingly interpreted this speech to Napoleon thus:"If a battle takes place within the next three days the French will win,but if later, God knows what will happen." Napoleon did not smile,though he was evidently in high good humor, and he ordered these wordsto be repeated.Lavrushka noticed this and to entertain him further, pretending not toknow who Napoleon was, added:"We know that you have Bonaparte and that he has beaten everybody in theworld, but we are a different matter..."--without knowing why or howthis bit of boastful patriotism slipped out at the end.The interpreter translated these words without the last phrase, andBonaparte smiled. "The young Cossack made his mighty interlocutorsmile," says Thiers. After riding a few paces in silence, Napoleonturned to Berthier and said he wished to see how the news that he wastalking to the Emperor himself, to that very Emperor who had written hisimmortally victorious name on the Pyramids, would affect this enfant duDon. ** "Child of the Don."The fact was accordingly conveyed to Lavrushka.Lavrushka, understanding that this was done to perplex him and thatNapoleon expected him to be frightened, to gratify his new masterspromptly pretended to be astonished and awe-struck, opened his eyeswide, and assumed the expression he usually put on when taken to bewhipped. "As soon as Napoleon's interpreter had spoken," says Thiers,"the Cossack, seized by amazement, did not utter another word, but rodeon, his eyes fixed on the conqueror whose fame had reached him acrossthe steppes of the East. All his loquacity was suddenly arrested andreplaced by a naive and silent feeling of admiration. Napoleon, aftermaking the Cossack a present, had him set free like a bird restored toits native fields."Napoleon rode on, dreaming of the Moscow that so appealed to hisimagination, and "the bird restored to its native fields" galloped toour outposts, inventing on the way all that had not taken place but thathe meant to relate to his comrades. What had really taken place he didnot wish to relate because it seemed to him not worth telling. He foundthe Cossacks, inquired for the regiment operating with Platov'sdetachment and by evening found his master, Nicholas Rostov, quarteredat Yankovo. Rostov was just mounting to go for a ride round theneighboring villages with Ilyin; he let Lavrushka have another horse andtook him along with him.CHAPTER VIIIPrincess Mary was not in Moscow and out of danger as Prince Andrewsupposed.After the return of Alpatych from Smolensk the old prince suddenlyseemed to awake as from a dream. He ordered the militiamen to be calledup from the villages and armed, and wrote a letter to the commander-in-chief informing him that he had resolved to remain at Bald Hills to thelast extremity and to defend it, leaving to the commander-in-chief'sdiscretion to take measures or not for the defense of Bald Hills, whereone of Russia's oldest generals would be captured or killed, and heannounced to his household that he would remain at Bald Hills.But while himself remaining, he gave instructions for the departure ofthe princess and Dessalles with the little prince to Bogucharovo andthence to Moscow. Princess Mary, alarmed by her father's feverish andsleepless activity after his previous apathy, could not bring herself toleave him alone and for the first time in her life ventured to disobeyhim. She refused to go away and her father's fury broke over her in aterrible storm. He repeated every injustice he had ever inflicted onher. Trying to convict her, he told her she had worn him out, had causedhis quarrel with his son, had harbored nasty suspicions of him, makingit the object of her life to poison his existence, and he drove her fromhis study telling her that if she did not go away it was all the same tohim. He declared that he did not wish to remember her existence andwarned her not to dare to let him see her. The fact that he did not, asshe had feared, order her to be carried away by force but only told hernot to let him see her cheered Princess Mary. She knew it was a proofthat in the depth of his soul he was glad she was remaining at home andhad not gone away.The morning after little Nicholas had left, the old prince donned hisfull uniform and prepared to visit the commander-in-chief. His calechewas already at the door. Princess Mary saw him walk out of the house inhis uniform wearing all his orders and go down the garden to review hisarmed peasants and domestic serfs. She sat by the window listening tohis voice which reached her from the garden. Suddenly several men camerunning up the avenue with frightened faces.Princess Mary ran out to the porch, down the flower-bordered path, andinto the avenue. A large crowd of militiamen and domestics were movingtoward her, and in their midst several men were supporting by thearmpits and dragging along a little old man in a uniform anddecorations. She ran up to him and, in the play of the sunlight thatfell in small round spots through the shade of the lime-tree avenue,could not be sure what change there was in his face. All she could seewas that his former stern and determined expression had altered to oneof timidity and submission. On seeing his daughter he moved his helplesslips and made a hoarse sound. It was impossible to make out what hewanted. He was lifted up, carried to his study, and laid on the verycouch he had so feared of late.The doctor, who was fetched that same night, bled him and said that theprince had had a seizure paralyzing his right side.It was becoming more and more dangerous to remain at Bald Hills, andnext day they moved the prince to Bogucharovo, the doctor accompanyinghim.By the time they reached Bogucharovo, Dessalles and the little princehad already left for Moscow.For three weeks the old prince lay stricken by paralysis in the newhouse Prince Andrew had built at Bogucharovo, ever in the same state,getting neither better nor worse. He was unconscious and lay like adistorted corpse. He muttered unceasingly, his eyebrows and lipstwitching, and it was impossible to tell whether he understood what wasgoing on around him or not. One thing was certain--that he was sufferingand wished to say something. But what it was, no one could tell: itmight be some caprice of a sick and half-crazy man, or it might relateto public affairs, or possibly to family concerns.The doctor said this restlessness did not mean anything and was due tophysical causes; but Princess Mary thought he wished to tell hersomething, and the fact that her presence always increased hisrestlessness confirmed her opinion.He was evidently suffering both physically and mentally. There was nohope of recovery. It was impossible for him to travel, it would not doto let him die on the road. "Would it not be better if the end did come,the very end?" Princess Mary sometimes thought. Night and day, hardlysleeping at all, she watched him and, terrible to say, often watched himnot with hope of finding signs of improvement but wishing to findsymptoms of the approach of the end.Strange as it was to her to acknowledge this feeling in herself, yetthere it was. And what seemed still more terrible to her was that sinceher father's illness began (perhaps even sooner, when she stayed withhim expecting something to happen), all the personal desires and hopesthat had been forgotten or sleeping within her had awakened. Thoughtsthat had not entered her mind for years--thoughts of a life free fromthe fear of her father, and even the possibility of love and of familyhappiness--floated continually in her imagination like temptations ofthe devil. Thrust them aside as she would, questions continuallyrecurred to her as to how she would order her life now, after that.These were temptations of the devil and Princess Mary knew it. She knewthat the sole weapon against him was prayer, and she tried to pray. Sheassumed an attitude of prayer, looked at the icons, repeated the wordsof a prayer, but she could not pray. She felt that a different world hadnow taken possession of her--the life of a world of strenuous and freeactivity, quite opposed to the spiritual world in which till now she hadbeen confined and in which her greatest comfort had been prayer. Shecould not pray, could not weep, and worldly cares took possession ofher.It was becoming dangerous to remain in Bogucharovo. News of the approachof the French came from all sides, and in one village, ten miles fromBogucharovo, a homestead had been looted by French marauders.The doctor insisted on the necessity of moving the prince; theprovincial Marshal of the Nobility sent an official to Princess Mary topersuade her to get away as quickly as possible, and the head of therural police having come to Bogucharovo urged the same thing, sayingthat the French were only some twenty-five miles away, that Frenchproclamations were circulating in the villages, and that if the princessdid not take her father away before the fifteenth, he could not answerfor the consequences.The princess decided to leave on the fifteenth. The cares of preparationand giving orders, for which everyone came to her, occupied her all day.She spent the night of the fourteenth as usual, without undressing, inthe room next to the one where the prince lay. Several times, waking up,she heard his groans and muttering, the creak of his bed, and the stepsof Tikhon and the doctor when they turned him over. Several times shelistened at the door, and it seemed to her that his mutterings werelouder than usual and that they turned him over oftener. She could notsleep and several times went to the door and listened, wishing to enterbut not deciding to do so. Though he did not speak, Princess Mary sawand knew how unpleasant every sign of anxiety on his account was to him.She had noticed with what dissatisfaction he turned from the look shesometimes involuntarily fixed on him. She knew that her going in duringthe night at an unusual hour would irritate him.But never had she felt so grieved for him or so much afraid of losinghim. She recalled all her life with him and in every word and act of hisfound an expression of his love of her. Occasionally amid these memoriestemptations of the devil would surge into her imagination: thoughts ofhow things would be after his death, and how her new, liberated lifewould be ordered. But she drove these thoughts away with disgust. Towardmorning he became quiet and she fell asleep.She woke late. That sincerity which often comes with waking showed herclearly what chiefly concerned her about her father's illness. On wakingshe listened to what was going on behind the door and, hearing himgroan, said to herself with a sigh that things were still the same."But what could have happened? What did I want? I want his death!" shecried with a feeling of loathing for herself.She washed, dressed, said her prayers, and went out to the porch. Infront of it stood carriages without horses and things were being packedinto the vehicles.It was a warm, gray morning. Princess Mary stopped at the porch, stillhorrified by her spiritual baseness and trying to arrange her thoughtsbefore going to her father. The doctor came downstairs and went out toher."He is a little better today," said he. "I was looking for you. One canmake out something of what he is saying. His head is clearer. Come in,he is asking for you..."Princess Mary's heart beat so violently at this news that she grew paleand leaned against the wall to keep from falling. To see him, talk tohim, feel his eyes on her now that her whole soul was overflowing withthose dreadful, wicked temptations, was a torment of joy and terror."Come," said the doctor.Princess Mary entered her father's room and went up to his bed. He waslying on his back propped up high, and his small bony hands with theirknotted purple veins were lying on the quilt; his left eye gazedstraight before him, his right eye was awry, and his brows and lipsmotionless. He seemed altogether so thin, small, and pathetic. His faceseemed to have shriveled or melted; his features had grown smaller.Princess Mary went up and kissed his hand. His left hand pressed hers sothat she understood that he had long been waiting for her to come. Hetwitched her hand, and his brows and lips quivered angrily.She looked at him in dismay trying to guess what he wanted of her. Whenshe changed her position so that his left eye could see her face hecalmed down, not taking his eyes off her for some seconds. Then his lipsand tongue moved, sounds came, and he began to speak, gazing timidly andimploringly at her, evidently afraid that she might not understand.Straining all her faculties Princess Mary looked at him. The comicefforts with which he moved his tongue made her drop her eyes and withdifficulty repress the sobs that rose to her throat. He said something,repeating the same words several times. She could not understand them,but tried to guess what he was saying and inquiringly repeated the wordshe uttered."Mmm...ar...ate...ate..." he repeated several times.It was quite impossible to understand these sounds. The doctor thoughthe had guessed them, and inquiringly repeated: "Mary, are you afraid?"The prince shook his head, again repeated the same sounds."My mind, my mind aches?" questioned Princess Mary.He made a mumbling sound in confirmation of this, took her hand, andbegan pressing it to different parts of his breast as if trying to findthe right place for it."Always thoughts... about you... thoughts..." he then uttered much moreclearly than he had done before, now that he was sure of beingunderstood.Princess Mary pressed her head against his hand, trying to hide her sobsand tears.He moved his hand over her hair."I have been calling you all night..." he brought out."If only I had known..." she said through her tears. "I was afraid tocome in."He pressed her hand."Weren't you asleep?""No, I did not sleep," said Princess Mary, shaking her head.Unconsciously imitating her father, she now tried to express herself ashe did, as much as possible by signs, and her tongue too seemed to movewith difficulty."Dear one... Dearest..." Princess Mary could not quite make out what hehad said, but from his look it was clear that he had uttered a tendercaressing word such as he had never used to her before. "Why didn't youcome in?""And I was wishing for his death!" thought Princess Mary.He was silent awhile."Thank you... daughter dear!... for all, for all... forgive!... thankyou!... forgive!... thank you!..." and tears began to flow from hiseyes. "Call Andrew!" he said suddenly, and a childish, timid expressionof doubt showed itself on his face as he spoke.He himself seemed aware that his demand was meaningless. So at least itseemed to Princess Mary."I have a letter from him," she replied.He glanced at her with timid surprise."Where is he?""He's with the army, Father, at Smolensk."He closed his eyes and remained silent a long time. Then as if in answerto his doubts and to confirm the fact that now he understood andremembered everything, he nodded his head and reopened his eyes."Yes," he said, softly and distinctly. "Russia has perished. They'vedestroyed her."And he began to sob, and again tears flowed from his eyes. Princess Marycould no longer restrain herself and wept while she gazed at his face.Again he closed his eyes. His sobs ceased, he pointed to his eyes, andTikhon, understanding him, wiped away the tears.Then he again opened his eyes and said something none of them couldunderstand for a long time, till at last Tikhon understood and repeatedit. Princess Mary had sought the meaning of his words in the mood inwhich he had just been speaking. She thought he was speaking of Russia,or Prince Andrew, of herself, of his grandson, or of his own death, andso she could not guess his words."Put on your white dress. I like it," was what he said.Having understood this Princess Mary sobbed still louder, and the doctortaking her arm led her out to the veranda, soothing her and trying topersuade her to prepare for her journey. When she had left the room theprince again began speaking about his son, about the war, and about theEmperor, angrily twitching his brows and raising his hoarse voice, andthen he had a second and final stroke.Princess Mary stayed on the veranda. The day had cleared, it was hot andsunny. She could understand nothing, think of nothing and feel nothing,except passionate love for her father, love such as she thought she hadnever felt till that moment. She ran out sobbing into the garden and asfar as the pond, along the avenues of young lime trees Prince Andrew hadplanted."Yes... I... I... I wished for his death! Yes, I wanted it to endquicker.... I wished to be at peace.... And what will become of me? Whatuse will peace be when he is no longer here?" Princess Mary murmured,pacing the garden with hurried steps and pressing her hands to her bosomwhich heaved with convulsive sobs.When she had completed the tour of the garden, which brought her againto the house, she saw Mademoiselle Bourienne--who had remained atBogucharovo and did not wish to leave it--coming toward her with astranger. This was the Marshal of the Nobility of the district, who hadcome personally to point out to the princess the necessity for herprompt departure. Princess Mary listened without understanding him; sheled him to the house, offered him lunch, and sat down with him. Then,excusing herself, she went to the door of the old prince's room. Thedoctor came out with an agitated face and said she could not enter."Go away, Princess! Go away... go away!"She returned to the garden and sat down on the grass at the foot of theslope by the pond, where no one could see her. She did not know how longshe had been there when she was aroused by the sound of a woman'sfootsteps running along the path. She rose and saw Dunyasha her maid,who was evidently looking for her, and who stopped suddenly as if inalarm on seeing her mistress."Please come, Princess... The Prince," said Dunyasha in a breakingvoice."Immediately, I'm coming, I'm coming!" replied the princess hurriedly,not giving Dunyasha time to finish what she was saying, and trying toavoid seeing the girl she ran toward the house."Princess, it's God's will! You must be prepared for everything," saidthe Marshal, meeting her at the house door."Let me alone; it's not true!" she cried angrily to him.The doctor tried to stop her. She pushed him aside and ran to herfather's door. "Why are these people with frightened faces stopping me?I don't want any of them! And what are they doing here?" she thought.She opened the door and the bright daylight in that previously darkenedroom startled her. In the room were her nurse and other women. They alldrew back from the bed, making way for her. He was still lying on thebed as before, but the stern expression of his quiet face made PrincessMary stop short on the threshold."No, he's not dead--it's impossible!" she told herself and approachedhim, and repressing the terror that seized her, she pressed her lips tohis cheek. But she stepped back immediately. All the force of thetenderness she had been feeling for him vanished instantly and wasreplaced by a feeling of horror at what lay there before her. "No, he isno more! He is not, but here where he was is something unfamiliar andhostile, some dreadful, terrifying, and repellent mystery!" And hidingher face in her hands, Princess Mary sank into the arms of the doctor,who held her up.In the presence of Tikhon and the doctor the women washed what had beenthe prince, tied his head up with a handkerchief that the mouth shouldnot stiffen while open, and with another handkerchief tied together thelegs that were already spreading apart. Then they dressed him in uniformwith his decorations and placed his shriveled little body on a table.Heaven only knows who arranged all this and when, but it all got done asif of its own accord. Toward night candles were burning round hiscoffin, a pall was spread over it, the floor was strewn with sprays ofjuniper, a printed band was tucked in under his shriveled head, and in acorner of the room sat a chanter reading the psalms.Just as horses shy and snort and gather about a dead horse, so theinmates of the house and strangers crowded into the drawing room roundthe coffin--the Marshal, the village Elder, peasant women--and all withfixed and frightened eyes, crossing themselves, bowed and kissed the oldprince's cold and stiffened hand.CHAPTER IXUntil Prince Andrew settled in Bogucharovo its owners had always beenabsentees, and its peasants were of quite a different character fromthose of Bald Hills. They differed from them in speech, dress, anddisposition. They were called steppe peasants. The old prince used toapprove of them for their endurance at work when they came to Bald Hillsto help with the harvest or to dig ponds, and ditches, but he dislikedthem for their boorishness.Prince Andrew's last stay at Bogucharovo, when he introduced hospitalsand schools and reduced the quitrent the peasants had to pay, had notsoftened their disposition but had on the contrary strengthened in themthe traits of character the old prince called boorishness. Variousobscure rumors were always current among them: at one time a rumor thatthey would all be enrolled as Cossacks; at another of a new religion towhich they were all to be converted; then of some proclamation of theTsar's and of an oath to the Tsar Paul in 1797 (in connection with whichit was rumored that freedom had been granted them but the landowners hadstopped it), then of Peter Fedorovich's return to the throne in sevenyears' time, when everything would be made free and so "simple" thatthere would be no restrictions. Rumors of the war with Bonaparte and hisinvasion were connected in their minds with the same sort of vaguenotions of Antichrist, the end of the world, and "pure freedom."In the vicinity of Bogucharovo were large villages belonging to thecrown or to owners whose serfs paid quitrent and could work where theypleased. There were very few resident landlords in the neighborhood andalso very few domestic or literate serfs, and in the lives of thepeasantry of those parts the mysterious undercurrents in the life of theRussian people, the causes and meaning of which are so baffling tocontemporaries, were more clearly and strongly noticeable than amongothers. One instance, which had occurred some twenty years before, was amovement among the peasants to emigrate to some unknown "warm rivers."Hundreds of peasants, among them the Bogucharovo folk, suddenly beganselling their cattle and moving in whole families toward the southeast.As birds migrate to somewhere beyond the sea, so these men with theirwives and children streamed to the southeast, to parts where none ofthem had ever been. They set off in caravans, bought their freedom oneby one or ran away, and drove or walked toward the "warm rivers." Manyof them were punished, some sent to Siberia, many died of cold andhunger on the road, many returned of their own accord, and the movementdied down of itself just as it had sprung up, without apparent reason.But such undercurrents still existed among the people and gathered newforces ready to manifest themselves just as strangely, unexpectedly, andat the same time simply, naturally, and forcibly. Now in 1812, to anyoneliving in close touch with these people it was apparent that theseundercurrents were acting strongly and nearing an eruption.Alpatych, who had reached Bogucharovo shortly before the old prince'sdeath, noticed an agitation among the peasants, and that contrary towhat was happening in the Bald Hills district, where over a radius offorty miles all the peasants were moving away and leaving their villagesto be devastated by the Cossacks, the peasants in the steppe regionround Bogucharovo were, it was rumored, in touch with the French,received leaflets from them that passed from hand to hand, and did notmigrate. He learned from domestic serfs loyal to him that the peasantKarp, who possessed great influence in the village commune and hadrecently been away driving a government transport, had returned withnews that the Cossacks were destroying deserted villages, but that theFrench did not harm them. Alpatych also knew that on the previous dayanother peasant had even brought from the village of Visloukhovo, whichwas occupied by the French, a proclamation by a French general that noharm would be done to the inhabitants, and if they remained they wouldbe paid for anything taken from them. As proof of this the peasant hadbrought from Visloukhovo a hundred rubles in notes (he did not know thatthey were false) paid to him in advance for hay.More important still, Alpatych learned that on the morning of the veryday he gave the village Elder orders to collect carts to move theprincess' luggage from Bogucharovo, there had been a village meeting atwhich it had been decided not to move but to wait. Yet there was no timeto waste. On the fifteenth, the day of the old prince's death, theMarshal had insisted on Princess Mary's leaving at once, as it wasbecoming dangerous. He had told her that after the sixteenth he couldnot be responsible for what might happen. On the evening of the day theold prince died the Marshal went away, promising to return next day forthe funeral. But this he was unable to do, for he received tidings thatthe French had unexpectedly advanced, and had barely time to remove hisown family and valuables from his estate.For some thirty years Bogucharovo had been managed by the village Elder,Dron, whom the old prince called by the diminutive "Dronushka."Dron was one of those physically and mentally vigorous peasants who growbig beards as soon as they are of age and go on unchanged till they aresixty or seventy, without a gray hair or the loss of a tooth, asstraight and strong at sixty as at thirty.Soon after the migration to the "warm rivers," in which he had takenpart like the rest, Dron was made village Elder and overseer ofBogucharovo, and had since filled that post irreproachably for twenty-three years. The peasants feared him more than they did their master.The masters, both the old prince and the young, and the stewardrespected him and jestingly called him "the Minister." During the wholetime of his service Dron had never been drunk or ill, never aftersleepless nights or the hardest tasks had he shown the least fatigue,and though he could not read he had never forgotten a single moneyaccount or the number of quarters of flour in any of the endlesscartloads he sold for the prince, nor a single shock of the whole corncrop on any single acre of the Bogucharovo fields.Alpatych, arriving from the devastated Bald Hills estate, sent for hisDron on the day of the prince's funeral and told him to have twelvehorses got ready for the princess' carriages and eighteen carts for thethings to be removed from Bogucharovo. Though the peasants paidquitrent, Alpatych thought no difficulty would be made about complyingwith this order, for there were two hundred and thirty households atwork in Bogucharovo and the peasants were well to do. But on hearing theorder Dron lowered his eyes and remained silent. Alpatych named certainpeasants he knew, from whom he told him to take the carts.Dron replied that the horses of these peasants were away carting.Alpatych named others, but they too, according to Dron, had no horsesavailable: some horses were carting for the government, others were tooweak, and others had died for want of fodder. It seemed that no horsescould be had even for the carriages, much less for the carting.Alpatych looked intently at Dron and frowned. Just as Dron was a modelvillage Elder, so Alpatych had not managed the prince's estates fortwenty years in vain. He was a model steward, possessing in the highestdegree the faculty of divining the needs and instincts of those he dealtwith. Having glanced at Dron he at once understood that his answers didnot express his personal views but the general mood of the Bogucharovocommune, by which the Elder had already been carried away. But he alsoknew that Dron, who had acquired property and was hated by the commune,must be hesitating between the two camps: the masters' and the serfs'.He noticed this hesitation in Dron's look and therefore frowned andmoved closer up to him."Now just listen, Dronushka," said he. "Don't talk nonsense to me. Hisexcellency Prince Andrew himself gave me orders to move all the peopleaway and not leave them with the enemy, and there is an order from theTsar about it too. Anyone who stays is a traitor to the Tsar. Do youhear?""I hear," Dron answered without lifting his eyes.Alpatych was not satisfied with this reply."Eh, Dron, it will turn out badly!" he said, shaking his head."The power is in your hands," Dron rejoined sadly."Eh, Dron, drop it!" Alpatych repeated, withdrawing his hand from hisbosom and solemnly pointing to the floor at Dron's feet. "I can seethrough you and three yards into the ground under you," he continued,gazing at the floor in front of Dron.Dron was disconcerted, glanced furtively at Alpatych and again loweredhis eyes."You drop this nonsense and tell the people to get ready to leave theirhomes and go to Moscow and to get carts ready for tomorrow morning forthe princess' things. And don't go to any meeting yourself, do youhear?"Dron suddenly fell on his knees."Yakov Alpatych, discharge me! Take the keys from me and discharge me,for Christ's sake!""Stop that!" cried Alpatych sternly. "I see through you and three yardsunder you," he repeated, knowing that his skill in beekeeping, hisknowledge of the right time to sow the oats, and the fact that he hadbeen able to retain the old prince's favor for twenty years had longsince gained him the reputation of being a wizard, and that the power ofseeing three yards under a man is considered an attribute of wizards.Dron got up and was about to say something, but Alpatych interruptedhim."What is it you have got into your heads, eh?... What are you thinkingof, eh?""What am I to do with the people?" said Dron. "They're quite besidethemselves; I have already told them...""'Told them,' I dare say!" said Alpatych. "Are they drinking?" he askedabruptly."Quite beside themselves, Yakov Alpatych; they've fetched anotherbarrel.""Well, then, listen! I'll go to the police officer, and you tell themso, and that they must stop this and the carts must be got ready.""I understand."Alpatych did not insist further. He had managed people for a long timeand knew that the chief way to make them obey is to show no suspicionthat they can possibly disobey. Having wrung a submissive "I understand"from Dron, Alpatych contented himself with that, though he not onlydoubted but felt almost certain that without the help of troops thecarts would not be forthcoming.And so it was, for when evening came no carts had been provided. In thevillage, outside the drink shop, another meeting was being held, whichdecided that the horses should be driven out into the woods and thecarts should not be provided. Without saying anything of this to theprincess, Alpatych had his own belongings taken out of the carts whichhad arrived from Bald Hills and had those horses got ready for theprincess' carriages. Meanwhile he went himself to the policeauthorities.CHAPTER XAfter her father's funeral Princess Mary shut herself up in her room anddid not admit anyone. A maid came to the door to say that Alpatych wasasking for orders about their departure. (This was before his talk withDron.) Princess Mary raised herself on the sofa on which she had beenlying and replied through the closed door that she did not mean to goaway and begged to be left in peace.The windows of the room in which she was lying looked westward. She layon the sofa with her face to the wall, fingering the buttons of theleather cushion and seeing nothing but that cushion, and her confusedthoughts were centered on one subject--the irrevocability of death andher own spiritual baseness, which she had not suspected, but which hadshown itself during her father's illness. She wished to pray but did notdare to, dared not in her present state of mind address herself to God.She lay for a long time in that position.The sun had reached the other side of the house, and its slanting raysshone into the open window, lighting up the room and part of the moroccocushion at which Princess Mary was looking. The flow of her thoughtssuddenly stopped. Unconsciously she sat up, smoothed her hair, got up,and went to the window, involuntarily inhaling the freshness of theclear but windy evening."Yes, you can well enjoy the evening now! He is gone and no one willhinder you," she said to herself, and sinking into a chair she let herhead fall on the window sill.Someone spoke her name in a soft and tender voice from the garden andkissed her head. She looked up. It was Mademoiselle Bourienne in a blackdress and weepers. She softly approached Princess Mary, sighed, kissedher, and immediately began to cry. The princess looked up at her. Alltheir former disharmony and her own jealousy recurred to her mind. Butshe remembered too how he had changed of late toward MademoiselleBourienne and could not bear to see her, thereby showing how unjust werethe reproaches Princess Mary had mentally addressed to her. "Besides, isit for me, for me who desired his death, to condemn anyone?" shethought.Princess Mary vividly pictured to herself the position of MademoiselleBourienne, whom she had of late kept at a distance, but who yet wasdependent on her and living in her house. She felt sorry for her andheld out her hand with a glance of gentle inquiry. MademoiselleBourienne at once began crying again and kissed that hand, speaking ofthe princess' sorrow and making herself a partner in it. She said heronly consolation was the fact that the princess allowed her to share hersorrow, that all the old misunderstandings should sink into nothing butthis great grief; that she felt herself blameless in regard to everyone,and that he, from above, saw her affection and gratitude. The princessheard her, not heeding her words but occasionally looking up at her andlistening to the sound of her voice."Your position is doubly terrible, dear princess," said MademoiselleBourienne after a pause. "I understand that you could not, and cannot,think of yourself, but with my love for you I must do so.... HasAlpatych been to you? Has he spoken to you of going away?" she asked.Princess Mary did not answer. She did not understand who was to go orwhere to. "Is it possible to plan or think of anything now? Is it notall the same?" she thought, and did not reply."You know, chere Marie," said Mademoiselle Bourienne, "that we are indanger--are surrounded by the French. It would be dangerous to move now.If we go we are almost sure to be taken prisoners, and God knows..."Princess Mary looked at her companion without understanding what she wastalking about."Oh, if anyone knew how little anything matters to me now," she said."Of course I would on no account wish to go away from him.... Alpatychdid say something about going.... Speak to him; I can do nothing,nothing, and don't want to....""I've spoken to him. He hopes we should be in time to get away tomorrow,but I think it would now be better to stay here," said MademoiselleBourienne. "Because, you will agree, chere Marie, to fall into the handsof the soldiers or of riotous peasants would be terrible."Mademoiselle Bourienne took from her reticule a proclamation (notprinted on ordinary Russian paper) of General Rameau's, telling peoplenot to leave their homes and that the French authorities would affordthem proper protection. She handed this to the princess."I think it would be best to appeal to that general," she continued,"and I am sure that all due respect would be shown you."Princess Mary read the paper, and her face began to quiver with stifledsobs."From whom did you get this?" she asked."They probably recognized that I am French, by my name," repliedMademoiselle Bourienne blushing.Princess Mary, with the paper in her hand, rose from the window and witha pale face went out of the room and into what had been Prince Andrew'sstudy."Dunyasha, send Alpatych, or Dronushka, or somebody to me!" she said,"and tell Mademoiselle Bourienne not to come to me," she added, hearingMademoiselle Bourienne's voice. "We must go at once, at once!" she said,appalled at the thought of being left in the hands of the French."If Prince Andrew heard that I was in the power of the French! That I,the daughter of Prince Nicholas Bolkonski, asked General Rameau forprotection and accepted his favor!" This idea horrified her, made hershudder, blush, and feel such a rush of anger and pride as she had neverexperienced before. All that was distressing, and especially all thatwas humiliating, in her position rose vividly to her mind. "They, theFrench, would settle in this house: M. le General Rameau would occupyPrince Andrew's study and amuse himself by looking through and readinghis letters and papers. Mademoiselle Bourienne would do the honors ofBogucharovo for him. I should be given a small room as a favor, thesoldiers would violate my father's newly dug grave to steal his crossesand stars, they would tell me of their victories over the Russians, andwould pretend to sympathize with my sorrow..." thought Princess Mary,not thinking her own thoughts but feeling bound to think like her fatherand her brother. For herself she did not care where she remained or whathappened to her, but she felt herself the representative of her deadfather and of Prince Andrew. Involuntarily she thought their thoughtsand felt their feelings. What they would have said and what they wouldhave done she felt bound to say and do. She went into Prince Andrew'sstudy, trying to enter completely into his ideas, and considered herposition.The demands of life, which had seemed to her annihilated by her father'sdeath, all at once rose before her with a new, previously unknown forceand took possession of her.Agitated and flushed she paced the room, sending now for MichaelIvanovich and now for Tikhon or Dron. Dunyasha, the nurse, and the othermaids could not say in how far Mademoiselle Bourienne's statement wascorrect. Alpatych was not at home, he had gone to the police. Neithercould the architect Michael Ivanovich, who on being sent for came inwith sleepy eyes, tell Princess Mary anything. With just the same smileof agreement with which for fifteen years he had been accustomed toanswer the old prince without expressing views of his own, he nowreplied to Princess Mary, so that nothing definite could be got from hisanswers. The old valet Tikhon, with sunken, emaciated face that bore thestamp of inconsolable grief, replied: "Yes, Princess" to all PrincessMary's questions and hardly refrained from sobbing as he looked at her.At length Dron, the village Elder, entered the room and with a deep bowto Princess Mary came to a halt by the doorpost.Princess Mary walked up and down the room and stopped in front of him."Dronushka," she said, regarding as a sure friend this Dronushka whoalways used to bring a special kind of gingerbread from his visit to thefair at Vyazma every year and smilingly offer it to her, "Dronushka, nowsince our misfortune..." she began, but could not go on."We are all in God's hands," said he, with a sigh.They were silent for a while."Dronushka, Alpatych has gone off somewhere and I have no one to turnto. Is it true, as they tell me, that I can't even go away?""Why shouldn't you go away, your excellency? You can go," said Dron."I was told it would be dangerous because of the enemy. Dear friend, Ican do nothing. I understand nothing. I have nobody! I want to go awaytonight or early tomorrow morning."Dron paused. He looked askance at Princess Mary and said: "There are nohorses; I told Yakov Alpatych so.""Why are there none?" asked the princess."It's all God's scourge," said Dron. "What horses we had have been takenfor the army or have died--this is such a year! It's not a case offeeding horses--we may die of hunger ourselves! As it is, some go threedays without eating. We've nothing, we've been ruined."Princess Mary listened attentively to what he told her."The peasants are ruined? They have no bread?" she asked."They're dying of hunger," said Dron. "It's not a case of carting.""But why didn't you tell me, Dronushka? Isn't it possible to help them?I'll do all I can...."To Princess Mary it was strange that now, at a moment when such sorrowwas filling her soul, there could be rich people and poor, and the richcould refrain from helping the poor. She had heard vaguely that therewas such a thing as "landlord's corn" which was sometimes given to thepeasants. She also knew that neither her father nor her brother wouldrefuse to help the peasants in need, she only feared to make somemistake in speaking about the distribution of the grain she wished togive. She was glad such cares presented themselves, enabling her withoutscruple to forget her own grief. She began asking Dron about thepeasants' needs and what there was in Bogucharovo that belonged to thelandlord."But we have grain belonging to my brother?" she said."The landlord's grain is all safe," replied Dron proudly. "Our princedid not order it to be sold.""Give it to the peasants, let them have all they need; I give you leavein my brother's name," said she.Dron made no answer but sighed deeply."Give them that corn if there is enough of it. Distribute it all. I givethis order in my brother's name; and tell them that what is ours istheirs. We do not grudge them anything. Tell them so."Dron looked intently at the princess while she was speaking."Discharge me, little mother, for God's sake! Order the keys to be takenfrom me," said he. "I have served twenty-three years and have done nowrong. Discharge me, for God's sake!"Princess Mary did not understand what he wanted of her or why he wasasking to be discharged. She replied that she had never doubted hisdevotion and that she was ready to do anything for him and for thepeasants.CHAPTER XIAn hour later Dunyasha came to tell the princess that Dron had come, andall the peasants had assembled at the barn by the princess' order andwished to have word with their mistress."But I never told them to come," said Princess Mary. "I only told Dronto let them have the grain.""Only, for God's sake, Princess dear, have them sent away and don't goout to them. It's all a trick," said Dunyasha, "and when Yakov Alpatychreturns let us get away... and please don't...""What is a trick?" asked Princess Mary in surprise."I know it is, only listen to me for God's sake! Ask nurse too. They saythey don't agree to leave Bogucharovo as you ordered.""You're making some mistake. I never ordered them to go away," saidPrincess Mary. "Call Dronushka."Dron came and confirmed Dunyasha's words; the peasants had come by theprincess' order."But I never sent for them," declared the princess. "You must have givenmy message wrong. I only said that you were to give them the grain."Dron only sighed in reply."If you order it they will go away," said he."No, no. I'll go out to them," said Princess Mary, and in spite of thenurse's and Dunyasha's protests she went out into the porch; Dron,Dunyasha, the nurse, and Michael Ivanovich following her."They probably think I am offering them the grain to bribe them toremain here, while I myself go away leaving them to the mercy of theFrench," thought Princess Mary. "I will offer them monthly rations andhousing at our Moscow estate. I am sure Andrew would do even more in myplace," she thought as she went out in the twilight toward the crowdstanding on the pasture by the barn.The men crowded closer together, stirred, and rapidly took off theirhats. Princess Mary lowered her eyes and, tripping over her skirt, cameclose up to them. So many different eyes, old and young, were fixed onher, and there were so many different faces, that she could notdistinguish any of them and, feeling that she must speak to them all atonce, did not know how to do it. But again the sense that sherepresented her father and her brother gave her courage, and she boldlybegan her speech."I am very glad you have come," she said without raising her eyes, andfeeling her heart beating quickly and violently. "Dronushka tells methat the war has ruined you. That is our common misfortune, and I shallgrudge nothing to help you. I am myself going away because it isdangerous here... the enemy is near... because... I am giving youeverything, my friends, and I beg you to take everything, all our grain,so that you may not suffer want! And if you have been told that I amgiving you the grain to keep you here--that is not true. On thecontrary, I ask you to go with all your belongings to our estate nearMoscow, and I promise you I will see to it that there you shall want fornothing. You shall be given food and lodging."The princess stopped. Sighs were the only sound heard in the crowd."I am not doing this on my own account," she continued, "I do it in thename of my dead father, who was a good master to you, and of my brotherand his son."Again she paused. No one broke the silence."Ours is a common misfortune and we will share it together. All that ismine is yours," she concluded, scanning the faces before her.All eyes were gazing at her with one and the same expression. She couldnot fathom whether it was curiosity, devotion, gratitude, orapprehension and distrust--but the expression on all the faces wasidentical."We are all very thankful for your bounty, but it won't do for us totake the landlord's grain," said a voice at the back of the crowd."But why not?" asked the princess.No one replied and Princess Mary, looking round at the crowd, found thatevery eye she met now was immediately dropped."But why don't you want to take it?" she asked again.No one answered.The silence began to oppress the princess and she tried to catchsomeone's eye."Why don't you speak?" she inquired of a very old man who stood just infront of her leaning on his stick. "If you think something more iswanted, tell me! I will do anything," said she, catching his eye.But as if this angered him, he bent his head quite low and muttered:"Why should we agree? We don't want the grain.""Why should we give up everything? We don't agree. Don't agree.... Weare sorry for you, but we're not willing. Go away yourself, alone..."came from various sides of the crowd.And again all the faces in that crowd bore an identical expression,though now it was certainly not an expression of curiosity or gratitude,but of angry resolve."But you can't have understood me," said Princess Mary with a sad smile."Why don't you want to go? I promise to house and feed you, while herethe enemy would ruin you..."But her voice was drowned by the voices of the crowd."We're not willing. Let them ruin us! We won't take your grain. We don'tagree."Again Princess Mary tried to catch someone's eye, but not a single eyein the crowd was turned to her; evidently they were all trying to avoidher look. She felt strange and awkward."Oh yes, an artful tale! Follow her into slavery! Pull down your housesand go into bondage! I dare say! 'I'll give you grain, indeed!' shesays," voices in the crowd were heard saying.With drooping head Princess Mary left the crowd and went back to thehouse. Having repeated her order to Dron to have horses ready for herdeparture next morning, she went to her room and remained alone with herown thoughts.CHAPTER XIIFor a long time that night Princess Mary sat by the open window of herroom hearing the sound of the peasants' voices that reached her from thevillage, but it was not of them she was thinking. She felt that shecould not understand them however much she might think about them. Shethought only of one thing, her sorrow, which, after the break caused bycares for the present, seemed already to belong to the past. Now shecould remember it and weep or pray.After sunset the wind had dropped. The night was calm and fresh. Towardmidnight the voices began to subside, a cock crowed, the full moon beganto show from behind the lime trees, a fresh white dewy mist began torise, and stillness reigned over the village and the house.Pictures of the near past--her father's illness and last moments--roseone after another to her memory. With mournful pleasure she now lingeredover these images, repelling with horror only the last one, the pictureof his death, which she felt she could not contemplate even inimagination at this still and mystic hour of night. And these picturespresented themselves to her so clearly and in such detail that theyseemed now present, now past, and now future.She vividly recalled the moment when he had his first stroke and wasbeing dragged along by his armpits through the garden at Bald Hills,muttering something with his helpless tongue, twitching his grayeyebrows and looking uneasily and timidly at her."Even then he wanted to tell me what he told me the day he died," shethought. "He had always thought what he said then." And she recalled inall its detail the night at Bald Hills before he had the last stroke,when with a foreboding of disaster she had remained at home against hiswill. She had not slept and had stolen downstairs on tiptoe, and goingto the door of the conservatory where he slept that night had listenedat the door. In a suffering and weary voice he was saying something toTikhon, speaking of the Crimea and its warm nights and of the Empress.Evidently he had wanted to talk. "And why didn't he call me? Why didn'the let me be there instead of Tikhon?" Princess Mary had thought andthought again now. "Now he will never tell anyone what he had in hissoul. Never will that moment return for him or for me when he might havesaid all he longed to say, and not Tikhon but I might have heard andunderstood him. Why didn't I enter the room?" she thought. "Perhaps hewould then have said to me what he said the day he died. While talkingto Tikhon he asked about me twice. He wanted to see me, and I wasstanding close by, outside the door. It was sad and painful for him totalk to Tikhon who did not understand him. I remember how he beganspeaking to him about Lise as if she were alive--he had forgotten shewas dead--and Tikhon reminded him that she was no more, and he shouted,'Fool!' He was greatly depressed. From behind the door I heard how helay down on his bed groaning and loudly exclaimed, 'My God!' Why didn'tI go in then? What could he have done to me? What could I have lost? Andperhaps he would then have been comforted and would have said that wordto me." And Princess Mary uttered aloud the caressing word he had saidto her on the day of his death. "Dear-est!" she repeated, and begansobbing, with tears that relieved her soul. She now saw his face beforeher. And not the face she had known ever since she could remember andhad always seen at a distance, but the timid, feeble face she had seenfor the first time quite closely, with all its wrinkles and details,when she stooped near to his mouth to catch what he said."Dear-est!" she repeated again."What was he thinking when he uttered that word? What is he thinkingnow?" This question suddenly presented itself to her, and in answer shesaw him before her with the expression that was on his face as he lay inhis coffin with his chin bound up with a white handkerchief. And thehorror that had seized her when she touched him and convinced herselfthat that was not he, but something mysterious and horrible, seized heragain. She tried to think of something else and to pray, but could doneither. With wide-open eyes she gazed at the moonlight and the shadows,expecting every moment to see his dead face, and she felt that thesilence brooding over the house and within it held her fast."Dunyasha," she whispered. "Dunyasha!" she screamed wildly, and tearingherself out of this silence she ran to the servants' quarters to meether old nurse and the maidservants who came running toward her.CHAPTER XIIIOn the seventeenth of August Rostov and Ilyin, accompanied by Lavrushkawho had just returned from captivity and by an hussar orderly, lefttheir quarters at Yankovo, ten miles from Bogucharovo, and went for aride--to try a new horse Ilyin had bought and to find out whether therewas any hay to be had in the villages.For the last three days Bogucharovo had lain between the two hostilearmies, so that it was as easy for the Russian rearguard to get to it asfor the French vanguard; Rostov, as a careful squadron commander, wishedto take such provisions as remained at Bogucharovo before the Frenchcould get them.Rostov and Ilyin were in the merriest of moods. On the way toBogucharovo, a princely estate with a dwelling house and farm where theyhoped to find many domestic serfs and pretty girls, they questionedLavrushka about Napoleon and laughed at his stories, and raced oneanother to try Ilyin's horse.Rostov had no idea that the village he was entering was the property ofthat very Bolkonski who had been engaged to his sister.Rostov and Ilyin gave rein to their horses for a last race along theincline before reaching Bogucharovo, and Rostov, outstripping Ilyin, wasthe first to gallop into the village street."You're first!" cried Ilyin, flushed."Yes, always first both on the grassland and here," answered Rostov,stroking his heated Donets horse."And I'd have won on my Frenchy, your excellency," said Lavrushka frombehind, alluding to his shabby cart horse, "only I didn't wish tomortify you."They rode at a footpace to the barn, where a large crowd of peasants wasstanding.Some of the men bared their heads, others stared at the new arrivalswithout doffing their caps. Two tall old peasants with wrinkled facesand scanty beards emerged from the tavern, smiling, staggering, andsinging some incoherent song, and approached the officers."Fine fellows!" said Rostov laughing. "Is there any hay here?""And how like one another," said Ilyin."A mo-o-st me-r-r-y co-o-m-pa...!" sang one of the peasants with ablissful smile.One of the men came out of the crowd and went up to Rostov."Who do you belong to?" he asked."The French," replied Ilyin jestingly, "and here is Napoleon himself"--and he pointed to Lavrushka."Then you are Russians?" the peasant asked again."And is there a large force of you here?" said another, a short man,coming up."Very large," answered Rostov. "But why have you collected here?" headded. "Is it a holiday?""The old men have met to talk over the business of the commune," repliedthe peasant, moving away.At that moment, on the road leading from the big house, two women and aman in a white hat were seen coming toward the officers."The one in pink is mine, so keep off!" said Ilyin on seeing Dunyasharunning resolutely toward him."She'll be ours!" said Lavrushka to Ilyin, winking."What do you want, my pretty?" said Ilyin with a smile."The princess ordered me to ask your regiment and your name.""This is Count Rostov, squadron commander, and I am your humbleservant.""Co-o-om-pa-ny!" roared the tipsy peasant with a beatific smile as helooked at Ilyin talking to the girl. Following Dunyasha, Alpatychadvanced to Rostov, having bared his head while still at a distance."May I make bold to trouble your honor?" said he respectfully, but witha shade of contempt for the youthfulness of this officer and with a handthrust into his bosom. "My mistress, daughter of General in Chief PrinceNicholas Bolkonski who died on the fifteenth of this month, findingherself in difficulties owing to the boorishness of these people"--hepointed to the peasants--"asks you to come up to the house.... Won'tyou, please, ride on a little farther," said Alpatych with a melancholysmile, "as it is not convenient in the presence of...?" He pointed tothe two peasants who kept as close to him as horseflies to a horse."Ah!... Alpatych... Ah, Yakov Alpatych... Grand! Forgive us for Christ'ssake, eh?" said the peasants, smiling joyfully at him.Rostov looked at the tipsy peasants and smiled."Or perhaps they amuse your honor?" remarked Alpatych with a staid air,as he pointed at the old men with his free hand."No, there's not much to be amused at here," said Rostov, and rode on alittle way. "What's the matter?" he asked."I make bold to inform your honor that the rude peasants here don't wishto let the mistress leave the estate, and threaten to unharness herhorses, so that though everything has been packed up since morning, herexcellency cannot get away.""Impossible!" exclaimed Rostov."I have the honor to report to you the actual truth," said Alpatych.Rostov dismounted, gave his horse to the orderly, and followed Alpatychto the house, questioning him as to the state of affairs. It appearedthat the princess' offer of corn to the peasants the previous day, andher talk with Dron and at the meeting, had actually had so bad an effectthat Dron had finally given up the keys and joined the peasants and hadnot appeared when Alpatych sent for him; and that in the morning whenthe princess gave orders to harness for her journey, the peasants hadcome in a large crowd to the barn and sent word that they would not lether leave the village: that there was an order not to move, and thatthey would unharness the horses. Alpatych had gone out to admonish them,but was told (it was chiefly Karp who did the talking, Dron not showinghimself in the crowd) that they could not let the princess go, thatthere was an order to the contrary, but that if she stayed they wouldserve her as before and obey her in everything.At the moment when Rostov and Ilyin were galloping along the road,Princess Mary, despite the dissuasions of Alpatych, her nurse, and themaids, had given orders to harness and intended to start, but when thecavalrymen were espied they were taken for Frenchmen, the coachman ranaway, and the women in the house began to wail."Father! Benefactor! God has sent you!" exclaimed deeply moved voices asRostov passed through the anteroom.Princess Mary was sitting helpless and bewildered in the large sittingroom, when Rostov was shown in. She could not grasp who he was and whyhe had come, or what was happening to her. When she saw his Russianface, and by his walk and the first words he uttered recognized him as aman of her own class, she glanced at him with her deep radiant look andbegan speaking in a voice that faltered and trembled with emotion. Thismeeting immediately struck Rostov as a romantic event. "A helpless girloverwhelmed with grief, left to the mercy of coarse, rioting peasants!And what a strange fate sent me here! What gentleness and nobility thereare in her features and expression!" thought he as he looked at her andlistened to her timid story.When she began to tell him that all this had happened the day after herfather's funeral, her voice trembled. She turned away, and then, as iffearing he might take her words as meant to move him to pity, looked athim with an apprehensive glance of inquiry. There were tears in Rostov'seyes. Princess Mary noticed this and glanced gratefully at him with thatradiant look which caused the plainness of her face to be forgotten."I cannot express, Princess, how glad I am that I happened to ride hereand am able to show my readiness to serve you," said Rostov, rising. "Gowhen you please, and I give you my word of honor that no one shall dareto cause you annoyance if only you will allow me to act as your escort."And bowing respectfully, as if to a lady of royal blood, he moved towardthe door.Rostov's deferential tone seemed to indicate that though he wouldconsider himself happy to be acquainted with her, he did not wish totake advantage of her misfortunes to intrude upon her.Princess Mary understood this and appreciated his delicacy."I am very, very grateful to you," she said in French, "but I hope itwas all a misunderstanding and that no one is to blame for it." Shesuddenly began to cry."Excuse me!" she said.Rostov, knitting his brows, left the room with another low bow.CHAPTER XIV"Well, is she pretty? Ah, friend--my pink one is delicious; her name isDunyasha...."But on glancing at Rostov's face Ilyin stopped short. He saw that hishero and commander was following quite a different train of thought.Rostov glanced angrily at Ilyin and without replying strode off withrapid steps to the village."I'll show them; I'll give it to them, the brigands!" said he tohimself.Alpatych at a gliding trot, only just managing not to run, kept up withhim with difficulty."What decision have you been pleased to come to?" said he.Rostov stopped and, clenching his fists, suddenly and sternly turned onAlpatych."Decision? What decision? Old dotard!..." cried he. "What have you beenabout? Eh? The peasants are rioting, and you can't manage them? You're atraitor yourself! I know you. I'll flay you all alive!..." And as ifafraid of wasting his store of anger, he left Alpatych and went rapidlyforward. Alpatych, mastering his offended feelings, kept pace withRostov at a gliding gait and continued to impart his views. He said thepeasants were obdurate and that at the present moment it would beimprudent to "overresist" them without an armed force, and would it notbe better first to send for the military?"I'll give them armed force... I'll 'overresist' them!" uttered Rostovmeaninglessly, breathless with irrational animal fury and the need tovent it.Without considering what he would do he moved unconciously with quick,resolute steps toward the crowd. And the nearer he drew to it the moreAlpatych felt that this unreasonable action might produce good results.The peasants in the crowd were similarly impressed when they sawRostov's rapid, firm steps and resolute, frowning face.After the hussars had come to the village and Rostov had gone to see theprincess, a certain confusion and dissension had arisen among the crowd.Some of the peasants said that these new arrivals were Russians andmight take it amiss that the mistress was being detained. Dron was ofthis opinion, but as soon as he expressed it Karp and others attackedtheir ex-Elder."How many years have you been fattening on the commune?" Karp shouted athim. "It's all one to you! You'll dig up your pot of money and take itaway with you.... What does it matter to you whether our homes areruined or not?""We've been told to keep order, and that no one is to leave their homesor take away a single grain, and that's all about it!" cried another."It was your son's turn to be conscripted, but no fear! You begrudgedyour lump of a son," a little old man suddenly began attacking Dron--"and so they took my Vanka to be shaved for a soldier! But we all haveto die.""To be sure, we all have to die. I'm not against the commune," saidDron."That's it--not against it! You've filled your belly...."The two tall peasants had their say. As soon as Rostov, followed byIlyin, Lavrushka, and Alpatych, came up to the crowd, Karp, thrustinghis fingers into his belt and smiling a little, walked to the front.Dron on the contrary retired to the rear and the crowd drew closertogether."Who is your Elder here? Hey?" shouted Rostov, coming up to the crowdwith quick steps."The Elder? What do you want with him?..." asked Karp.But before the words were well out of his mouth, his cap flew off and afierce blow jerked his head to one side."Caps off, traitors!" shouted Rostov in a wrathful voice. "Where's theElder?" he cried furiously."The Elder.... He wants the Elder!... Dron Zakharych, you!" meek andflustered voices here and there were heard calling and caps began tocome off their heads."We don't riot, we're following the orders," declared Karp, and at thatmoment several voices began speaking together."It's as the old men have decided--there's too many of you givingorders.""Arguing? Mutiny!... Brigands! Traitors!" cried Rostov unmeaningly in avoice not his own, gripping Karp by the collar. "Bind him, bind him!" heshouted, though there was no one to bind him but Lavrushka and Alpatych.Lavrushka, however, ran up to Karp and seized him by the arms frombehind."Shall I call up our men from beyond the hill?" he called out.Alpatych turned to the peasants and ordered two of them by name to comeand bind Karp. The men obediently came out of the crowd and began takingoff their belts."Where's the Elder?" demanded Rostov in a loud voice.With a pale and frowning face Dron stepped out of the crowd."Are you the Elder? Bind him, Lavrushka!" shouted Rostov, as if thatorder, too, could not possibly meet with any opposition.And in fact two more peasants began binding Dron, who took off his ownbelt and handed it to them, as if to aid them."And you all listen to me!" said Rostov to the peasants. "Be off to yourhouses at once, and don't let one of your voices be heard!""Why, we've not done any harm! We did it just out of foolishness. It'sall nonsense... I said then that it was not in order," voices were heardbickering with one another."There! What did I say?" said Alpatych, coming into his own again. "It'swrong, lads!""All our stupidity, Yakov Alpatych," came the answers, and the crowdbegan at once to disperse through the village.The two bound men were led off to the master's house. The two drunkenpeasants followed them."Aye, when I look at you!..." said one of them to Karp."How can one talk to the masters like that? What were you thinking of,you fool?" added the other--"A real fool!"Two hours later the carts were standing in the courtyard of theBogucharovo house. The peasants were briskly carrying out theproprietor's goods and packing them on the carts, and Dron, liberated atPrincess Mary's wish from the cupboard where he had been confined, wasstanding in the yard directing the men."Don't put it in so carelessly," said one of the peasants, a man with around smiling face, taking a casket from a housemaid. "You know it hascost money! How can you chuck it in like that or shove it under the cordwhere it'll get rubbed? I don't like that way of doing things. Let itall be done properly, according to rule. Look here, put it under thebast matting and cover it with hay--that's the way!""Eh, books, books!" said another peasant, bringing out Prince Andrew'slibrary cupboards. "Don't catch up against it! It's heavy, lads--solidbooks.""Yes, they worked all day and didn't play!" remarked the tall, round-faced peasant gravely, pointing with a significant wink at thedictionaries that were on the top.Unwilling to obtrude himself on the princess, Rostov did not go back tothe house but remained in the village awaiting her departure. When hercarriage drove out of the house, he mounted and accompanied her eightmiles from Bogucharovo to where the road was occupied by our troops. Atthe inn at Yankovo he respectfully took leave of her, for the first timepermitting himself to kiss her hand."How can you speak so!" he blushingly replied to Princess Mary'sexpressions of gratitude for her deliverance, as she termed what hadoccurred. "Any police officer would have done as much! If we had hadonly peasants to fight, we should not have let the enemy come so far,"said he with a sense of shame and wishing to change the subject. "I amonly happy to have had the opportunity of making your acquaintance.Good-bye, Princess. I wish you happiness and consolation and hope tomeet you again in happier circumstances. If you don't want to make meblush, please don't thank me!"But the princess, if she did not again thank him in words, thanked himwith the whole expression of her face, radiant with gratitude andtenderness. She could not believe that there was nothing to thank himfor. On the contrary, it seemed to her certain that had he not beenthere she would have perished at the hands of the mutineers and of theFrench, and that he had exposed himself to terrible and obvious dangerto save her, and even more certain was it that he was a man of lofty andnoble soul, able to understand her position and her sorrow. His kind,honest eyes, with the tears rising in them when she herself had begun tocry as she spoke of her loss, did not leave her memory.When she had taken leave of him and remained alone she suddenly felt hereyes filling with tears, and then not for the first time the strangequestion presented itself to her: did she love him?On the rest of the way to Moscow, though the princess' position was nota cheerful one, Dunyasha, who went with her in the carriage, more thanonce noticed that her mistress leaned out of the window and smiled atsomething with an expression of mingled joy and sorrow."Well, supposing I do love him?" thought Princess Mary.Ashamed as she was of acknowledging to herself that she had fallen inlove with a man who would perhaps never love her, she comforted herselfwith the thought that no one would ever know it and that she would notbe to blame if, without ever speaking of it to anyone, she continued tothe end of her life to love the man with whom she had fallen in love forthe first and last time in her life.Sometimes when she recalled his looks, his sympathy, and his words,happiness did not appear impossible to her. It was at those moments thatDunyasha noticed her smiling as she looked out of the carriage window."Was it not fate that brought him to Bogucharovo, and at that verymoment?" thought Princess Mary. "And that caused his sister to refuse mybrother?" And in all this Princess Mary saw the hand of Providence.The impression the princess made on Rostov was a very agreeable one. Toremember her gave him pleasure, and when his comrades, hearing of hisadventure at Bogucharovo, rallied him on having gone to look for hay andhaving picked up one of the wealthiest heiresses in Russia, he grewangry. It made him angry just because the idea of marrying the gentlePrincess Mary, who was attractive to him and had an enormous fortune,had against his will more than once entered his head. For himselfpersonally Nicholas could not wish for a better wife: by marrying her hewould make the countess his mother happy, would be able to put hisfather's affairs in order, and would even--he felt it--ensure PrincessMary's happiness.But Sonya? And his plighted word? That was why Rostov grew angry when hewas rallied about Princess Bolkonskaya.CHAPTER XVOn receiving command of the armies Kutuzov remembered Prince Andrew andsent an order for him to report at headquarters.Prince Andrew arrived at Tsarevo-Zaymishche on the very day and at thevery hour that Kutuzov was reviewing the troops for the first time. Hestopped in the village at the priest's house in front of which stood thecommander-in-chief's carriage, and he sat down on the bench at the gateawaiting his Serene Highness, as everyone now called Kutuzov. From thefield beyond the village came now sounds of regimental music and now theroar of many voices shouting "Hurrah!" to the new commander-in-chief.Two orderlies, a courier and a major-domo, stood near by, some ten pacesfrom Prince Andrew, availing themselves of Kutuzov's absence and of thefine weather. A short, swarthy lieutenant colonel of hussars with thickmustaches and whiskers rode up to the gate and, glancing at PrinceAndrew, inquired whether his Serene Highness was putting up there andwhether he would soon be back.Prince Andrew replied that he was not on his Serene Highness' staff butwas himself a new arrival. The lieutenant colonel turned to a smartorderly, who, with the peculiar contempt with which a commander-in-chief's orderly speaks to officers, replied:"What? His Serene Highness? I expect he'll be here soon. What do youwant?"The lieutenant colonel of hussars smiled beneath his mustache at theorderly's tone, dismounted, gave his horse to a dispatch runner, andapproached Bolkonski with a slight bow. Bolkonski made room for him onthe bench and the lieutenant colonel sat down beside him."You're also waiting for the commander-in-chief?" said he. "They say heweceives evewyone, thank God!... It's awful with those sausage eaters!Ermolov had weason to ask to be pwomoted to be a German! Now p'wapsWussians will get a look in. As it was, devil only knows what washappening. We kept wetweating and wetweating. Did you take part in thecampaign?" he asked."I had the pleasure," replied Prince Andrew, "not only of taking part inthe retreat but of losing in that retreat all I held dear--not tomention the estate and home of my birth--my father, who died of grief. Ibelong to the province of Smolensk.""Ah? You're Pwince Bolkonski? Vewy glad to make your acquaintance! I'mLieutenant Colonel Denisov, better known as 'Vaska,'" said Denisov,pressing Prince Andrew's hand and looking into his face with aparticularly kindly attention. "Yes, I heard," said he sympathetically,and after a short pause added: "Yes, it's Scythian warfare. It's allvewy well--only not for those who get it in the neck. So you are PwinceAndwew Bolkonski?" He swayed his head. "Vewy pleased, Pwince, to makeyour acquaintance!" he repeated again, smiling sadly, and he againpressed Prince Andrew's hand.Prince Andrew knew Denisov from what Natasha had told him of her firstsuitor. This memory carried him sadly and sweetly back to those painfulfeelings of which he had not thought lately, but which still found placein his soul. Of late he had received so many new and very seriousimpressions--such as the retreat from Smolensk, his visit to Bald Hills,and the recent news of his father's death--and had experienced so manyemotions, that for a long time past those memories had not entered hismind, and now that they did, they did not act on him with nearly theirformer strength. For Denisov, too, the memories awakened by the name ofBolkonski belonged to a distant, romantic past, when after supper andafter Natasha's singing he had proposed to a little girl of fifteenwithout realizing what he was doing. He smiled at the recollection ofthat time and of his love for Natasha, and passed at once to what nowinterested him passionately and exclusively. This was a plan of campaignhe had devised while serving at the outposts during the retreat. He hadproposed that plan to Barclay de Tolly and now wished to propose it toKutuzov. The plan was based on the fact that the French line ofoperation was too extended, and it proposed that instead of, orconcurrently with, action on the front to bar the advance of the French,we should attack their line of communication. He began explaining hisplan to Prince Andrew."They can't hold all that line. It's impossible. I will undertake tobweak thwough. Give me five hundwed men and I will bweak the line,that's certain! There's only one way--guewilla warfare!"Denisov rose and began gesticulating as he explained his plan toBolkonski. In the midst of his explanation shouts were heard from thearmy, growing more incoherent and more diffused, mingling with music andsongs and coming from the field where the review was held. Sounds ofhoofs and shouts were nearing the village."He's coming! He's coming!" shouted a Cossack standing at the gate.Bolkonski and Denisov moved to the gate, at which a knot of soldiers (aguard of honor) was standing, and they saw Kutuzov coming down thestreet mounted on a rather small sorrel horse. A huge suite of generalsrode behind him. Barclay was riding almost beside him, and a crowd ofofficers ran after and around them shouting, "Hurrah!"His adjutants galloped into the yard before him. Kutuzov was impatientlyurging on his horse, which ambled smoothly under his weight, and heraised his hand to his white Horse Guard's cap with a red band and nopeak, nodding his head continually. When he came up to the guard ofhonor, a fine set of Grenadiers mostly wearing decorations, who weregiving him the salute, he looked at them silently and attentively fornearly a minute with the steady gaze of a commander and then turned tothe crowd of generals and officers surrounding him. Suddenly his faceassumed a subtle expression, he shrugged his shoulders with an air ofperplexity."And with such fine fellows to retreat and retreat! Well, good-by,General," he added, and rode into the yard past Prince Andrew andDenisov."Hurrah! hurrah! hurrah!" shouted those behind him.Since Prince Andrew had last seen him Kutuzov had grown still morecorpulent, flaccid, and fat. But the bleached eyeball, the scar, and thefamiliar weariness of his expression were still the same. He was wearingthe white Horse Guard's cap and a military overcoat with a whip hangingover his shoulder by a thin strap. He sat heavily and swayed limply onhis brisk little horse."Whew... whew... whew!" he whistled just audibly as he rode into theyard. His face expressed the relief of relaxed strain felt by a man whomeans to rest after a ceremony. He drew his left foot out of the stirrupand, lurching with his whole body and puckering his face with theeffort, raised it with difficulty onto the saddle, leaned on his knee,groaned, and slipped down into the arms of the Cossacks and adjutantswho stood ready to assist him.He pulled himself together, looked round, screwing up his eyes, glancedat Prince Andrew, and, evidently not recognizing him, moved with hiswaddling gait to the porch. "Whew... whew... whew!" he whistled, andagain glanced at Prince Andrew. As often occurs with old men, it wasonly after some seconds that the impression produced by Prince Andrew'sface linked itself up with Kutuzov's remembrance of his personality."Ah, how do you do, my dear prince? How do you do, my dear boy? Comealong..." said he, glancing wearily round, and he stepped onto the porchwhich creaked under his weight.He unbuttoned his coat and sat down on a bench in the porch."And how's your father?""I received news of his death, yesterday," replied Prince Andrewabruptly.Kutuzov looked at him with eyes wide open with dismay and then took offhis cap and crossed himself:"May the kingdom of Heaven be his! God's will be done to us all!" Hesighed deeply, his whole chest heaving, and was silent for a while. "Iloved him and respected him, and sympathize with you with all my heart."He embraced Prince Andrew, pressing him to his fat breast, and for sometime did not let him go. When he released him Prince Andrew saw thatKutuzov's flabby lips were trembling and that tears were in his eyes. Hesighed and pressed on the bench with both hands to raise himself."Come! Come with me, we'll have a talk," said he.But at that moment Denisov, no more intimidated by his superiors than bythe enemy, came with jingling spurs up the steps of the porch, despitethe angry whispers of the adjutants who tried to stop him. Kutuzov, hishands still pressed on the seat, glanced at him glumly. Denisov, havinggiven his name, announced that he had to communicate to his SereneHighness a matter of great importance for their country's welfare.Kutuzov looked wearily at him and, lifting his hands with a gesture ofannoyance, folded them across his stomach, repeating the words: "For ourcountry's welfare? Well, what is it? Speak!" Denisov blushed like a girl(it was strange to see the color rise in that shaggy, bibulous, time-worn face) and boldly began to expound his plan of cutting the enemy'slines of communication between Smolensk and Vyazma. Denisov came fromthose parts and knew the country well. His plan seemed decidedly a goodone, especially from the strength of conviction with which he spoke.Kutuzov looked down at his own legs, occasionally glancing at the doorof the adjoining hut as if expecting something unpleasant to emerge fromit. And from that hut, while Denisov was speaking, a general with aportfolio under his arm really did appear."What?" said Kutuzov, in the midst of Denisov's explanations, "are youready so soon?""Ready, your Serene Highness," replied the general.Kutuzov swayed his head, as much as to say: "How is one man to deal withit all?" and again listened to Denisov."I give my word of honor as a Wussian officer," said Denisov, "that Ican bweak Napoleon's line of communication!""What relation are you to Intendant General Kiril Andreevich Denisov?"asked Kutuzov, interrupting him."He is my uncle, your Sewene Highness.""Ah, we were friends," said Kutuzov cheerfully. "All right, all right,friend, stay here at the staff and tomorrow we'll have a talk."With a nod to Denisov he turned away and put out his hand for the papersKonovnitsyn had brought him."Would not your Serene Highness like to come inside?" said the generalon duty in a discontented voice, "the plans must be examined and severalpapers have to be signed."An adjutant came out and announced that everything was in readinesswithin. But Kutuzov evidently did not wish to enter that room till hewas disengaged. He made a grimace..."No, tell them to bring a small table out here, my dear boy. I'll lookat them here," said he. "Don't go away," he added, turning to PrinceAndrew, who remained in the porch and listened to the general's report.While this was being given, Prince Andrew heard the whisper of a woman'svoice and the rustle of a silk dress behind the door. Several times onglancing that way he noticed behind that door a plump, rosy, handsomewoman in a pink dress with a lilac silk kerchief on her head, holding adish and evidently awaiting the entrance of the commander-in-chief.Kutuzov's adjutant whispered to Prince Andrew that this was the wife ofthe priest whose home it was, and that she intended to offer his SereneHighness bread and salt. "Her husband has welcomed his Serene Highnesswith the cross at the church, and she intends to welcome him in thehouse.... She's very pretty," added the adjutant with a smile. At thosewords Kutuzov looked round. He was listening to the general's report--which consisted chiefly of a criticism of the position at Tsarevo-Zaymishche--as he had listened to Denisov, and seven years previouslyhad listened to the discussion at the Austerlitz council of war. Heevidently listened only because he had ears which, though there was apiece of tow in one of them, could not help hearing; but it was evidentthat nothing the general could say would surprise or even interest him,that he knew all that would be said beforehand, and heard it all onlybecause he had to, as one has to listen to the chanting of a service ofprayer. All that Denisov had said was clever and to the point. What thegeneral was saying was even more clever and to the point, but it wasevident that Kutuzov despised knowledge and cleverness, and knew ofsomething else that would decide the matter--something independent ofcleverness and knowledge. Prince Andrew watched the commander-in-chief'sface attentively, and the only expression he could see there was one ofboredom, curiosity as to the meaning of the feminine whispering behindthe door, and a desire to observe propriety. It was evident that Kutuzovdespised cleverness and learning and even the patriotic feeling shown byDenisov, but despised them not because of his own intellect, feelings,or knowledge--he did not try to display any of these--but because ofsomething else. He despised them because of his old age and experienceof life. The only instruction Kutuzov gave of his own accord during thatreport referred to looting by the Russian troops. At the end of thereport the general put before him for signature a paper relating to therecovery of payment from army commanders for green oats mown down by thesoldiers, when landowners lodged petitions for compensation.After hearing the matter, Kutuzov smacked his lips together and shookhis head."Into the stove... into the fire with it! I tell you once for all, mydear fellow," said he, "into the fire with all such things! Let them cutthe crops and burn wood to their hearts' content. I don't order it orallow it, but I don't exact compensation either. One can't get onwithout it. 'When wood is chopped the chips will fly.'" He looked at thepaper again. "Oh, this German precision!" he muttered, shaking his head.CHAPTER XVI"Well, that's all!" said Kutuzov as he signed the last of the documents,and rising heavily and smoothing out the folds in his fat white neck hemoved toward the door with a more cheerful expression.The priest's wife, flushing rosy red, caught up the dish she had afterall not managed to present at the right moment, though she had so longbeen preparing for it, and with a low bow offered it to Kutuzov.He screwed up his eyes, smiled, lifted her chin with his hand, and said:"Ah, what a beauty! Thank you, sweetheart!"He took some gold pieces from his trouser pocket and put them on thedish for her. "Well, my dear, and how are we getting on?" he asked,moving to the door of the room assigned to him. The priest's wifesmiled, and with dimples in her rosy cheeks followed him into the room.The adjutant came out to the porch and asked Prince Andrew to lunch withhim. Half an hour later Prince Andrew was again called to Kutuzov. Hefound him reclining in an armchair, still in the same unbuttonedovercoat. He had in his hand a French book which he closed as PrinceAndrew entered, marking the place with a knife. Prince Andrew saw by thecover that it was Les Chevaliers du Cygne by Madame de Genlis."Well, sit down, sit down here. Let's have a talk," said Kutuzov. "It'ssad, very sad. But remember, my dear fellow, that I am a father to you,a second father...."Prince Andrew told Kutuzov all he knew of his father's death, and whathe had seen at Bald Hills when he passed through it."What... what they have brought us to!" Kutuzov suddenly cried in anagitated voice, evidently picturing vividly to himself from PrinceAndrew's story the condition Russia was in. "But give me time, give metime!" he said with a grim look, evidently not wishing to continue thisagitating conversation, and added: "I sent for you to keep you with me.""I thank your Serene Highness, but I fear I am no longer fit for thestaff," replied Prince Andrew with a smile which Kutuzov noticed.Kutuzov glanced inquiringly at him."But above all," added Prince Andrew, "I have grown used to my regiment,am fond of the officers, and I fancy the men also like me. I should besorry to leave the regiment. If I decline the honor of being with you,believe me..."A shrewd, kindly, yet subtly derisive expression lit up Kutuzov's podgyface. He cut Bolkonski short."I am sorry, for I need you. But you're right, you're right! It's nothere that men are needed. Advisers are always plentiful, but men arenot. The regiments would not be what they are if the would-be advisersserved there as you do. I remember you at Austerlitz.... I remember,yes, I remember you with the standard!" said Kutuzov, and a flush ofpleasure suffused Prince Andrew's face at this recollection.Taking his hand and drawing him downwards, Kutuzov offered his cheek tobe kissed, and again Prince Andrew noticed tears in the old man's eyes.Though Prince Andrew knew that Kutuzov's tears came easily, and that hewas particularly tender to and considerate of him from a wish to showsympathy with his loss, yet this reminder of Austerlitz was bothpleasant and flattering to him."Go your way and God be with you. I know your path is the path ofhonor!" He paused. "I missed you at Bucharest, but I needed someone tosend." And changing the subject, Kutuzov began to speak of the Turkishwar and the peace that had been concluded. "Yes, I have been muchblamed," he said, "both for that war and the peace... but everythingcame at the right time. Tout vient a point a celui qui sait attendre. *And there were as many advisers there as here..." he went on, returningto the subject of "advisers" which evidently occupied him. "Ah, thoseadvisers!" said he. "If we had listened to them all we should not havemade peace with Turkey and should not have been through with that war.Everything in haste, but more haste, less speed. Kamenski would havebeen lost if he had not died. He stormed fortresses with thirty thousandmen. It is not difficult to capture a fortress but it is difficult towin a campaign. For that, not storming and attacking but patience andtime are wanted. Kamenski sent soldiers to Rustchuk, but I only employedthese two things and took more fortresses than Kamenski and made themTurks eat horseflesh!" He swayed his head. "And the French shall too,believe me," he went on, growing warmer and beating his chest, "I'llmake them eat horseflesh!" And tears again dimmed his eyes.* "Everything comes in time to him who knows how to wait.""But shan't we have to accept battle?" remarked Prince Andrew."We shall if everybody wants it; it can't be helped.... But believe me,my dear boy, there is nothing stronger than those two: patience andtime, they will do it all. But the advisers n'entendent pas de cetteoreille, voila le mal. * Some want a thing--others don't. What's one todo?" he asked, evidently expecting an answer. "Well, what do you want usto do?" he repeated and his eye shone with a deep, shrewd look. "I'lltell you what to do," he continued, as Prince Andrew still did notreply: "I will tell you what to do, and what I do. Dans le doute, moncher," he paused, "abstiens-toi" *(2)--he articulated the French proverbdeliberately.* "Don't see it that way, that's the trouble."* (2) "When in doubt, my dear fellow, do nothing.""Well, good-by, my dear fellow; remember that with all my heart I shareyour sorrow, and that for you I am not a Serene Highness, nor a prince,nor a commander-in-chief, but a father! If you want anything comestraight to me. Good-bye, my dear boy."Again he embraced and kissed Prince Andrew, but before the latter hadleft the room Kutuzov gave a sigh of relief and went on with hisunfinished novel, Les Chevaliers du Cygne by Madame de Genlis.Prince Andrew could not have explained how or why it was, but after thatinterview with Kutuzov he went back to his regiment reassured as to thegeneral course of affairs and as to the man to whom it had beenentrusted. The more he realized the absence of all personal motive inthat old man--in whom there seemed to remain only the habit of passions,and in place of an intellect (grouping events and drawing conclusions)only the capacity calmly to contemplate the course of events--the morereassured he was that everything would be as it should. "He will notbring in any plan of his own. He will not devise or undertake anything,"thought Prince Andrew, "but he will hear everything, remembereverything, and put everything in its place. He will not hinder anythinguseful nor allow anything harmful. He understands that there issomething stronger and more important than his own will--the inevitablecourse of events, and he can see them and grasp their significance, andseeing that significance can refrain from meddling and renounce hispersonal wish directed to something else. And above all," thought PrinceAndrew, "one believes in him because he's Russian, despite the novel byGenlis and the French proverbs, and because his voice shook when hesaid: 'What they have brought us to!' and had a sob in it when he saidhe would 'make them eat horseflesh!'"On such feelings, more or less dimly shared by all, the unanimity andgeneral approval were founded with which, despite court influences, thepopular choice of Kutuzov as commander-in-chief was received.CHAPTER XVIIAfter the Emperor had left Moscow, life flowed on there in its usualcourse, and its course was so very usual that it was difficult toremember the recent days of patriotic elation and ardor, hard to believethat Russia was really in danger and that the members of the EnglishClub were also sons of the Fatherland ready to sacrifice everything forit. The one thing that recalled the patriotic fervor everyone haddisplayed during the Emperor's stay was the call for contributions ofmen and money, a necessity that as soon as the promises had been madeassumed a legal, official form and became unavoidable.With the enemy's approach to Moscow, the Moscovites' view of theirsituation did not grow more serious but on the contrary became even morefrivolous, as always happens with people who see a great dangerapproaching. At the approach of danger there are always two voices thatspeak with equal power in the human soul: one very reasonably tells aman to consider the nature of the danger and the means of escaping it;the other, still more reasonably, says that it is too depressing andpainful to think of the danger, since it is not in man's power toforesee everything and avert the general course of events, and it istherefore better to disregard what is painful till it comes, and tothink about what is pleasant. In solitude a man generally listens to thefirst voice, but in society to the second. So it was now with theinhabitants of Moscow. It was long since people had been as gay inMoscow as that year.Rostopchin's broadsheets, headed by woodcuts of a drink shop, a potman,and a Moscow burgher called Karpushka Chigirin, "who--having been amilitiaman and having had rather too much at the pub--heard thatNapoleon wished to come to Moscow, grew angry, abused the French in verybad language, came out of the drink shop, and, under the sign of theeagle, began to address the assembled people," were read and discussed,together with the latest of Vasili Lvovich Pushkin's bouts rimes.In the corner room at the club, members gathered to read thesebroadsheets, and some liked the way Karpushka jeered at the French,saying: "They will swell up with Russian cabbage, burst with ourbuckwheat porridge, and choke themselves with cabbage soup. They are alldwarfs and one peasant woman will toss three of them with a hayfork."Others did not like that tone and said it was stupid and vulgar. It wassaid that Rostopchin had expelled all Frenchmen and even all foreignersfrom Moscow, and that there had been some spies and agents of Napoleonamong them; but this was told chiefly to introduce Rostopchin's wittyremark on that occasion. The foreigners were deported to Nizhni by boat,and Rostopchin had said to them in French: "Rentrez en vousmemes; entrezdans la barque, et n'en faites pas une barque de Charon." * There wastalk of all the government offices having been already removed fromMoscow, and to this Shinshin's witticism was added--that for that aloneMoscow ought to be grateful to Napoleon. It was said that Mamonov'sregiment would cost him eight hundred thousand rubles, and that Bezukhovhad spent even more on his, but that the best thing about Bezukhov'saction was that he himself was going to don a uniform and ride at thehead of his regiment without charging anything for the show.* "Think it over; get into the barque, and take care not to make it abarque of Charon.""You don't spare anyone," said Julie Drubetskaya as she collected andpressed together a bunch of raveled lint with her thin, beringedfingers.Julie was preparing to leave Moscow next day and was giving a farewellsoiree."Bezukhov est ridicule, but he is so kind and good-natured. Whatpleasure is there to be so caustique?""A forfeit!" cried a young man in militia uniform whom Julie called "monchevalier," and who was going with her to Nizhni.In Julie's set, as in many other circles in Moscow, it had been agreedthat they would speak nothing but Russian and that those who made a slipand spoke French should pay fines to the Committee of VoluntaryContributions."Another forfeit for a Gallicism," said a Russian writer who waspresent. "'What pleasure is there to be' is not Russian!""You spare no one," continued Julie to the young man without heeding theauthor's remark."For caustique--I am guilty and will pay, and I am prepared to pay againfor the pleasure of telling you the truth. For Gallicisms I won't beresponsible," she remarked, turning to the author: "I have neither themoney nor the time, like Prince Galitsyn, to engage a master to teach meRussian!""Ah, here he is!" she added. "Quand on... No, no," she said to themilitia officer, "you won't catch me. Speak of the sun and you see itsrays!" and she smiled amiably at Pierre. "We were just talking of you,"she said with the facility in lying natural to a society woman. "We weresaying that your regiment would be sure to be better than Mamonov's.""Oh, don't talk to me of my regiment," replied Pierre, kissing hishostess' hand and taking a seat beside her. "I am so sick of it.""You will, of course, command it yourself?" said Julie, directing a sly,sarcastic glance toward the militia officer.The latter in Pierre's presence had ceased to be caustic, and his faceexpressed perplexity as to what Julie's smile might mean. In spite ofhis absent-mindedness and good nature, Pierre's personality immediatelychecked any attempt to ridicule him to his face."No," said Pierre, with a laughing glance at his big, stout body. "Ishould make too good a target for the French, besides I am afraid Ishould hardly be able to climb onto a horse."Among those whom Julie's guests happened to choose to gossip about werethe Rostovs."I hear that their affairs are in a very bad way," said Julie. "And heis so unreasonable, the count himself I mean. The Razumovskis wanted tobuy his house and his estate near Moscow, but it drags on and on. Heasks too much.""No, I think the sale will come off in a few days," said someone."Though it is madness to buy anything in Moscow now.""Why?" asked Julie. "You don't think Moscow is in danger?""Then why are you leaving?""I? What a question! I am going because... well, because everyone isgoing: and besides--I am not Joan of Arc or an Amazon.""Well, of course, of course! Let me have some more strips of linen.""If he manages the business properly he will be able to pay off all hisdebts," said the militia officer, speaking of Rostov."A kindly old man but not up to much. And why do they stay on so long inMoscow? They meant to leave for the country long ago. Natalie is quitewell again now, isn't she?" Julie asked Pierre with a knowing smile."They are waiting for their younger son," Pierre replied. "He joinedObolenski's Cossacks and went to Belaya Tserkov where the regiment isbeing formed. But now they have had him transferred to my regiment andare expecting him every day. The count wanted to leave long ago, but thecountess won't on any account leave Moscow till her son returns.""I met them the day before yesterday at the Arkharovs'. Natalie hasrecovered her looks and is brighter. She sang a song. How easily somepeople get over everything!""Get over what?" inquired Pierre, looking displeased.Julie smiled."You know, Count, such knights as you are only found in Madame deSouza's novels.""What knights? What do you mean?" demanded Pierre, blushing."Oh, come, my dear count! C'est la fable de tout Moscou. Je vous admire,ma parole d'honneur!" ** "It is the talk of all Moscow. My word, I admire you!""Forfeit, forfeit!" cried the militia officer."All right, one can't talk--how tiresome!""What is 'the talk of all Moscow'?" Pierre asked angrily, rising to hisfeet."Come now, Count, you know!""I don't know anything about it," said Pierre."I know you were friendly with Natalie, and so... but I was always morefriendly with Vera--that dear Vera.""No, madame!" Pierre continued in a tone of displeasure, "I have nottaken on myself the role of Natalie Rostova's knight at all, and havenot been to their house for nearly a month. But I cannot understand thecruelty...""Qui s'excuse s'accuse," * said Julie, smiling and waving the linttriumphantly, and to have the last word she promptly changed thesubject. "Do you know what I heard today? Poor Mary Bolkonskaya arrivedin Moscow yesterday. Do you know that she has lost her father?"* "Who excuses himself, accuses himself.""Really? Where is she? I should like very much to see her," said Pierre."I spent the evening with her yesterday. She is going to their estatenear Moscow either today or tomorrow morning, with her nephew.""Well, and how is she?" asked Pierre."She is well, but sad. But do you know who rescued her? It is quite aromance. Nicholas Rostov! She was surrounded, and they wanted to killher and had wounded some of her people. He rushed in and saved her....""Another romance," said the militia officer. "Really, this generalflight has been arranged to get all the old maids married off. Caticheis one and Princess Bolkonskaya another.""Do you know, I really believe she is un petit peu amoureuse du jeunehomme." ** "A little bit in love with the young man.""Forfeit, forfeit, forfeit!""But how could one say that in Russian?"CHAPTER XVIIIWhen Pierre returned home he was handed two of Rostopchin's broadsheetsthat had been brought that day.The first declared that the report that Count Rostopchin had forbiddenpeople to leave Moscow was false; on the contrary he was glad thatladies and tradesmen's wives were leaving the city. "There will be lesspanic and less gossip," ran the broadsheet "but I will stake my life onit that scoundrel will not enter Moscow." These words showed Pierreclearly for the first time that the French would enter Moscow. Thesecond broadsheet stated that our headquarters were at Vyazma, thatCount Wittgenstein had defeated the French, but that as many of theinhabitants of Moscow wished to be armed, weapons were ready for them atthe arsenal: sabers, pistols, and muskets which could be had at a lowprice. The tone of the proclamation was not as jocose as in the formerChigirin talks. Pierre pondered over these broadsheets. Evidently theterrible stormcloud he had desired with the whole strength of his soulbut which yet aroused involuntary horror in him was drawing near."Shall I join the army and enter the service, or wait?" he asked himselffor the hundredth time. He took a pack of cards that lay on the tableand began to lay them out for a game of patience."If this patience comes out," he said to himself after shuffling thecards, holding them in his hand, and lifting his head, "if it comes out,it means... what does it mean?"He had not decided what it should mean when he heard the voice of theeldest princess at the door asking whether she might come in."Then it will mean that I must go to the army," said Pierre to himself."Come in, come in!" he added to the princess.Only the eldest princess, the one with the stony face and long waist,was still living in Pierre's house. The two younger ones had bothmarried."Excuse my coming to you, cousin," she said in a reproachful andagitated voice. "You know some decision must be come to. What is goingto happen? Everyone has left Moscow and the people are rioting. How isit that we are staying on?""On the contrary, things seem satisfactory, ma cousine," said Pierre inthe bantering tone he habitually adopted toward her, always feelinguncomfortable in the role of her benefactor."Satisfactory, indeed! Very satisfactory! Barbara Ivanovna told me todayhow our troops are distinguishing themselves. It certainly does themcredit! And the people too are quite mutinous--they no longer obey, evenmy maid has taken to being rude. At this rate they will soon beginbeating us. One can't walk in the streets. But, above all, the Frenchwill be here any day now, so what are we waiting for? I ask just onething of you, cousin," she went on, "arrange for me to be taken toPetersburg. Whatever I may be, I can't live under Bonaparte's rule.""Oh, come, ma cousine! Where do you get your information from? On thecontrary...""I won't submit to your Napoleon! Others may if they please.... If youdon't want to do this...""But I will, I'll give the order at once."The princess was apparently vexed at not having anyone to be angry with.Muttering to herself, she sat down on a chair."But you have been misinformed," said Pierre. "Everything is quiet inthe city and there is not the slightest danger. See! I've just beenreading..." He showed her the broadsheet. "Count Rostopchin writes thathe will stake his life on it that the enemy will not enter Moscow.""Oh, that count of yours!" said the princess malevolently. "He is ahypocrite, a rascal who has himself roused the people to riot. Didn't hewrite in those idiotic broadsheets that anyone, 'whoever it might be,should be dragged to the lockup by his hair'? (How silly!) 'And honorand glory to whoever captures him,' he says. This is what his cajoleryhas brought us to! Barbara Ivanovna told me the mob near killed herbecause she said something in French.""Oh, but it's so... You take everything so to heart," said Pierre, andbegan laying out his cards for patience.Although that patience did come out, Pierre did not join the army, butremained in deserted Moscow ever in the same state of agitation,irresolution, and alarm, yet at the same time joyfully expectingsomething terrible.Next day toward evening the princess set off, and Pierre's head stewardcame to inform him that the money needed for the equipment of hisregiment could not be found without selling one of the estates. Ingeneral the head steward made out to Pierre that his project of raisinga regiment would ruin him. Pierre listened to him, scarcely able torepress a smile."Well then, sell it," said he. "What's to be done? I can't draw backnow!"The worse everything became, especially his own affairs, the better wasPierre pleased and the more evident was it that the catastrophe heexpected was approaching. Hardly anyone he knew was left in town. Juliehad gone, and so had Princess Mary. Of his intimate friends only theRostovs remained, but he did not go to see them.To distract his thoughts he drove that day to the village of Vorontsovoto see the great balloon Leppich was constructing to destroy the foe,and a trial balloon that was to go up next day. The balloon was not yetready, but Pierre learned that it was being constructed by the Emperor'sdesire. The Emperor had written to Count Rostopchin as follows:As soon as Leppich is ready, get together a crew of reliable andintelligent men for his car and send a courier to General Kutuzov to lethim know. I have informed him of the matter.Please impress upon Leppich to be very careful where he descends for thefirst time, that he may not make a mistake and fall into the enemy'shands. It is essential for him to combine his movements with those ofthe commander-in-chief.On his way home from Vorontsovo, as he was passing the Bolotnoe PlacePierre, seeing a large crowd round the Lobnoe Place, stopped and got outof his trap. A French cook accused of being a spy was being flogged. Theflogging was only just over, and the executioner was releasing from theflogging bench a stout man with red whiskers, in blue stockings and agreen jacket, who was moaning piteously. Another criminal, thin andpale, stood near. Judging by their faces they were both Frenchmen. Witha frightened and suffering look resembling that on the thin Frenchman'sface, Pierre pushed his way in through the crowd."What is it? Who is it? What is it for?" he kept asking.But the attention of the crowd--officials, burghers, shopkeepers,peasants, and women in cloaks and in pelisses--was so eagerly centeredon what was passing in Lobnoe Place that no one answered him. The stoutman rose, frowned, shrugged his shoulders, and evidently trying toappear firm began to pull on his jacket without looking about him, butsuddenly his lips trembled and he began to cry, in the way full-bloodedgrown-up men cry, though angry with himself for doing so. In the crowdpeople began talking loudly, to stifle their feelings of pity as itseemed to Pierre."He's cook to some prince.""Eh, mounseer, Russian sauce seems to be sour to a Frenchman... sets histeeth on edge!" said a wrinkled clerk who was standing behind Pierre,when the Frenchman began to cry.The clerk glanced round, evidently hoping that his joke would beappreciated. Some people began to laugh, others continued to watch indismay the executioner who was undressing the other man.Pierre choked, his face puckered, and he turned hastily away, went backto his trap muttering something to himself as he went, and took hisseat. As they drove along he shuddered and exclaimed several times soaudibly that the coachman asked him:"What is your pleasure?""Where are you going?" shouted Pierre to the man, who was driving toLubyanka Street."To the Governor's, as you ordered," answered the coachman."Fool! Idiot!" shouted Pierre, abusing his coachman--a thing he rarelydid. "Home, I told you! And drive faster, blockhead!" "I must get awaythis very day," he murmured to himself.At the sight of the tortured Frenchman and the crowd surrounding theLobnoe Place, Pierre had so definitely made up his mind that he could nolonger remain in Moscow and would leave for the army that very day thatit seemed to him that either he had told the coachman this or that theman ought to have known it for himself.On reaching home Pierre gave orders to Evstafey--his head coachman whoknew everything, could do anything, and was known to all Moscow--that hewould leave that night for the army at Mozhaysk, and that his saddlehorses should be sent there. This could not all be arranged that day, soon Evstafey's representation Pierre had to put off his departure tillnext day to allow time for the relay horses to be sent on in advance.On the twenty-fourth the weather cleared up after a spell of rain, andafter dinner Pierre left Moscow. When changing horses that night inPerkhushkovo, he learned that there had been a great battle thatevening. (This was the battle of Shevardino.) He was told that there inPerkhushkovo the earth trembled from the firing, but nobody could answerhis questions as to who had won. At dawn next day Pierre was approachingMozhaysk.Every house in Mozhaysk had soldiers quartered in it, and at the hostelwhere Pierre was met by his groom and coachman there was no room to behad. It was full of officers.Everywhere in Mozhaysk and beyond it, troops were stationed or on themarch. Cossacks, foot and horse soldiers, wagons, caissons, and cannonwere everywhere. Pierre pushed forward as fast as he could, and thefarther he left Moscow behind and the deeper he plunged into that sea oftroops the more was he overcome by restless agitation and a new andjoyful feeling he had not experienced before. It was a feeling akin towhat he had felt at the Sloboda Palace during the Emperor's visit--asense of the necessity of undertaking something and sacrificingsomething. He now experienced a glad consciousness that everything thatconstitutes men's happiness--the comforts of life, wealth, even lifeitself--is rubbish it is pleasant to throw away, compared withsomething... With what? Pierre could not say, and he did not try todetermine for whom and for what he felt such particular delight insacrificing everything. He was not occupied with the question of what tosacrifice for; the fact of sacrificing in itself afforded him a new andjoyous sensation.CHAPTER XIXOn the twenty-fourth of August the battle of the Shevardino Redoubt wasfought, on the twenty-fifth not a shot was fired by either side, and onthe twenty-sixth the battle of Borodino itself took place.Why and how were the battles of Shevardino and Borodino given andaccepted? Why was the battle of Borodino fought? There was not the leastsense in it for either the French or the Russians. Its immediate resultfor the Russians was, and was bound to be, that we were brought nearerto the destruction of Moscow--which we feared more than anything in theworld; and for the French its immediate result was that they werebrought nearer to the destruction of their whole army--which they fearedmore than anything in the world. What the result must be was quiteobvious, and yet Napoleon offered and Kutuzov accepted that battle.If the commanders had been guided by reason, it would seem that it musthave been obvious to Napoleon that by advancing thirteen hundred milesand giving battle with a probability of losing a quarter of his army, hewas advancing to certain destruction, and it must have been equallyclear to Kutuzov that by accepting battle and risking the loss of aquarter of his army he would certainly lose Moscow. For Kutuzov this wasmathematically clear, as it is that if when playing draughts I have oneman less and go on exchanging, I shall certainly lose, and thereforeshould not exchange. When my opponent has sixteen men and I havefourteen, I am only one eighth weaker than he, but when I have exchangedthirteen more men he will be three times as strong as I am.Before the battle of Borodino our strength in proportion to the Frenchwas about as five to six, but after that battle it was little more thanone to two: previously we had a hundred thousand against a hundred andtwenty thousand; afterwards little more than fifty thousand against ahundred thousand. Yet the shrewd and experienced Kutuzov accepted thebattle, while Napoleon, who was said to be a commander of genius, gaveit, losing a quarter of his army and lengthening his lines ofcommunication still more. If it is said that he expected to end thecampaign by occupying Moscow as he had ended a previous campaign byoccupying Vienna, there is much evidence to the contrary. Napoleon'shistorians themselves tell us that from Smolensk onwards he wished tostop, knew the danger of his extended position, and knew that theoccupation of Moscow would not be the end of the campaign, for he hadseen at Smolensk the state in which Russian towns were left to him, andhad not received a single reply to his repeated announcements of hiswish to negotiate.In giving and accepting battle at Borodino, Kutuzov acted involuntarilyand irrationally. But later on, to fit what had occurred, the historiansprovided cunningly devised evidence of the foresight and genius of thegenerals who, of all the blind tools of history were the most enslavedand involuntary.The ancients have left us model heroic poems in which the heroes furnishthe whole interest of the story, and we are still unable to accustomourselves to the fact that for our epoch histories of that kind aremeaningless.On the other question, how the battle of Borodino and the precedingbattle of Shevardino were fought, there also exists a definite and well-known, but quite false, conception. All the historians describe theaffair as follows:The Russian army, they say, in its retreat from Smolensk sought out foritself the best position for a general engagement and found such aposition at Borodino.The Russians, they say, fortified this position in advance on the leftof the highroad (from Moscow to Smolensk) and almost at a right angle toit, from Borodino to Utitsa, at the very place where the battle wasfought.In front of this position, they say, a fortified outpost was set up onthe Shevardino mound to observe the enemy. On the twenty-fourth, we aretold, Napoleon attacked this advanced post and took it, and, on thetwenty-sixth, attacked the whole Russian army, which was in position onthe field of Borodino.So the histories say, and it is all quite wrong, as anyone who cares tolook into the matter can easily convince himself.The Russians did not seek out the best position but, on the contrary,during the retreat passed many positions better than Borodino. They didnot stop at any one of these positions because Kutuzov did not wish tooccupy a position he had not himself chosen, because the popular demandfor a battle had not yet expressed itself strongly enough, and becauseMiloradovich had not yet arrived with the militia, and for many otherreasons. The fact is that other positions they had passed were stronger,and that the position at Borodino (the one where the battle was fought),far from being strong, was no more a position than any other spot onemight find in the Russian Empire by sticking a pin into the map athazard.Not only did the Russians not fortify the position on the field ofBorodino to the left of, and at a right angle to, the highroad (that is,the position on which the battle took place), but never till the twenty-fifth of August, 1812, did they think that a battle might be foughtthere. This was shown first by the fact that there were no entrenchmentsthere by the twenty fifth and that those begun on the twenty-fifth andtwenty-sixth were not completed, and secondly, by the position of theShevardino Redoubt. That redoubt was quite senseless in front of theposition where the battle was accepted. Why was it more stronglyfortified than any other post? And why were all efforts exhausted andsix thousand men sacrificed to defend it till late at night on thetwenty-fourth? A Cossack patrol would have sufficed to observe theenemy. Thirdly, as proof that the position on which the battle wasfought had not been foreseen and that the Shevardino Redoubt was not anadvanced post of that position, we have the fact that up to the twenty-fifth, Barclay de Tolly and Bagration were convinced that the ShevardinoRedoubt was the left flank of the position, and that Kutuzov himself inhis report, written in hot haste after the battle, speaks of theShevardino Redoubt as the left flank of the position. It was much later,when reports on the battle of Borodino were written at leisure, that theincorrect and extraordinary statement was invented (probably to justifythe mistakes of a commander-in-chief who had to be represented asinfallible) that the Shevardino Redoubt was an advanced post--whereas inreality it was simply a fortified point on the left flank--and that thebattle of Borodino was fought by us on an entrenched position previouslyselected, where as it was fought on a quite unexpected spot which wasalmost unentrenched.The case was evidently this: a position was selected along the riverKolocha--which crosses the highroad not at a right angle but at an acuteangle--so that the left flank was at Shevardino, the right flank nearthe village of Novoe, and the center at Borodino at the confluence ofthe rivers Kolocha and Voyna.To anyone who looks at the field of Borodino without thinking of how thebattle was actually fought, this position, protected by the riverKolocha, presents itself as obvious for an army whose object was toprevent an enemy from advancing along the Smolensk road to Moscow.Napoleon, riding to Valuevo on the twenty-fourth, did not see (as thehistory books say he did) the position of the Russians from Utitsa toBorodino (he could not have seen that position because it did notexist), nor did he see an advanced post of the Russian army, but whilepursuing the Russian rearguard he came upon the left flank of theRussian position--at the Shevardino Redoubt--and unexpectedly for theRussians moved his army across the Kolocha. And the Russians, not havingtime to begin a general engagement, withdrew their left wing from theposition they had intended to occupy and took up a new position whichhad not been foreseen and was not fortified. By crossing to the otherside of the Kolocha to the left of the highroad, Napoleon shifted thewhole forthcoming battle from right to left (looking from the Russianside) and transferred it to the plain between Utitsa, Semenovsk, andBorodino--a plain no more advantageous as a position than any otherplain in Russia--and there the whole battle of the twenty-sixth ofAugust took place.Had Napoleon not ridden out on the evening of the twenty-fourth to theKolocha, and had he not then ordered an immediate attack on the redoubtbut had begun the attack next morning, no one would have doubted thatthe Shevardino Redoubt was the left flank of our position, and thebattle would have taken place where we expected it. In that case weshould probably have defended the Shevardino Redoubt--our left flank--still more obstinately. We should have attacked Napoleon in the centeror on the right, and the engagement would have taken place on thetwenty-fifth, in the position we intended and had fortified. But as theattack on our left flank took place in the evening after the retreat ofour rear guard (that is, immediately after the fight at Gridneva), andas the Russian commanders did not wish, or were not in time, to begin ageneral engagement then on the evening of the twenty-fourth, the firstand chief action of the battle of Borodino was already lost on thetwenty-fourth, and obviously led to the loss of the one fought on thetwenty-sixth.After the loss of the Shevardino Redoubt, we found ourselves on themorning of the twenty-fifth without a position for our left flank, andwere forced to bend it back and hastily entrench it where it chanced tobe.Not only was the Russian army on the twenty-sixth defended by weak,unfinished entrenchments, but the disadvantage of that position wasincreased by the fact that the Russian commanders--not having fullyrealized what had happened, namely the loss of our position on the leftflank and the shifting of the whole field of the forthcoming battle fromright to left--maintained their extended position from the village ofNovoe to Utitsa, and consequently had to move their forces from right toleft during the battle. So it happened that throughout the whole battlethe Russians opposed the entire French army launched against our leftflank with but half as many men. (Poniatowski's action against Utitsa,and Uvarov's on the right flank against the French, were actionsdistinct from the main course of the battle.) So the battle of Borodinodid not take place at all as (in an effort to conceal our commanders'mistakes even at the cost of diminishing the glory due to the Russianarmy and people) it has been described. The battle of Borodino was notfought on a chosen and entrenched position with forces only slightlyweaker than those of the enemy, but, as a result of the loss of theShevardino Redoubt, the Russians fought the battle of Borodino on anopen and almost unentrenched position, with forces only half as numerousas the French; that is to say, under conditions in which it was notmerely unthinkable to fight for ten hours and secure an indecisiveresult, but unthinkable to keep an army even from completedisintegration and flight.CHAPTER XXOn the morning of the twenty-fifth Pierre was leaving Mozhaysk. At thedescent of the high steep hill, down which a winding road led out of thetown past the cathedral on the right, where a service was being held andthe bells were ringing, Pierre got out of his vehicle and proceeded onfoot. Behind him a cavalry regiment was coming down the hill preceded byits singers. Coming up toward him was a train of carts carrying men whohad been wounded in the engagement the day before. The peasant drivers,shouting and lashing their horses, kept crossing from side to side. Thecarts, in each of which three or four wounded soldiers were lying orsitting, jolted over the stones that had been thrown on the steepincline to make it something like a road. The wounded, bandaged withrags, with pale cheeks, compressed lips, and knitted brows, held on tothe sides of the carts as they were jolted against one another. Almostall of them stared with naive, childlike curiosity at Pierre's white hatand green swallow-tail coat.Pierre's coachman shouted angrily at the convoy of wounded to keep toone side of the road. The cavalry regiment, as it descended the hillwith its singers, surrounded Pierre's carriage and blocked the road.Pierre stopped, being pressed against the side of the cutting in whichthe road ran. The sunshine from behind the hill did not penetrate intothe cutting and there it was cold and damp, but above Pierre's head wasthe bright August sunshine and the bells sounded merrily. One of thecarts with wounded stopped by the side of the road close to Pierre. Thedriver in his bast shoes ran panting up to it, placed a stone under oneof its tireless hind wheels, and began arranging the breech-band on hislittle horse.One of the wounded, an old soldier with a bandaged arm who was followingthe cart on foot, caught hold of it with his sound hand and turned tolook at Pierre."I say, fellow countryman! Will they set us down here or take us on toMoscow?" he asked.Pierre was so deep in thought that he did not hear the question. He waslooking now at the cavalry regiment that had met the convoy of wounded,now at the cart by which he was standing, in which two wounded men weresitting and one was lying. One of those sitting up in the cart hadprobably been wounded in the cheek. His whole head was wrapped in ragsand one cheek was swollen to the size of a baby's head. His nose andmouth were twisted to one side. This soldier was looking at thecathedral and crossing himself. Another, a young lad, a fair-hairedrecruit as white as though there was no blood in his thin face, lookedat Pierre kindly, with a fixed smile. The third lay prone so that hisface was not visible. The cavalry singers were passing close by:Ah lost, quite lost... is my head so keen, Living in a foreign land.they sang their soldiers' dance song.As if responding to them but with a different sort of merriment, themetallic sound of the bells reverberated high above and the hot rays ofthe sun bathed the top of the opposite slope with yet another sort ofmerriment. But beneath the slope, by the cart with the wounded near thepanting little nag where Pierre stood, it was damp, somber, and sad.The soldier with the swollen cheek looked angrily at the cavalrysingers."Oh, the coxcombs!" he muttered reproachfully."It's not the soldiers only, but I've seen peasants today, too.... Thepeasants--even they have to go," said the soldier behind the cart,addressing Pierre with a sad smile. "No distinctions made nowadays....They want the whole nation to fall on them--in a word, it's Moscow! Theywant to make an end of it."In spite of the obscurity of the soldier's words Pierre understood whathe wanted to say and nodded approval.The road was clear again; Pierre descended the hill and drove on.He kept looking to either side of the road for familiar faces, but onlysaw everywhere the unfamiliar faces of various military men of differentbranches of the service, who all looked with astonishment at his whitehat and green tail coat.Having gone nearly three miles he at last met an acquaintance andeagerly addressed him. This was one of the head army doctors. He wasdriving toward Pierre in a covered gig, sitting beside a young surgeon,and on recognizing Pierre he told the Cossack who occupied the driver'sseat to pull up."Count! Your excellency, how come you to be here?" asked the doctor."Well, you know, I wanted to see...""Yes, yes, there will be something to see...."Pierre got out and talked to the doctor, explaining his intention oftaking part in a battle.The doctor advised him to apply direct to Kutuzov."Why should you be God knows where out of sight, during the battle?" hesaid, exchanging glances with his young companion. "Anyhow his SereneHighness knows you and will receive you graciously. That's what you mustdo."The doctor seemed tired and in a hurry."You think so?... Ah, I also wanted to ask you where our position isexactly?" said Pierre."The position?" repeated the doctor. "Well, that's not my line. Drivepast Tatarinova, a lot of digging is going on there. Go up the hillockand you'll see.""Can one see from there?... If you would..."But the doctor interrupted him and moved toward his gig."I would go with you but on my honor I'm up to here"--and he pointed tohis throat. "I'm galloping to the commander of the corps. How do mattersstand?... You know, Count, there'll be a battle tomorrow. Out of an armyof a hundred thousand we must expect at least twenty thousand wounded,and we haven't stretchers, or bunks, or dressers, or doctors enough forsix thousand. We have ten thousand carts, but we need other things aswell--we must manage as best we can!"The strange thought that of the thousands of men, young and old, who hadstared with merry surprise at his hat (perhaps the very men he hadnoticed), twenty thousand were inevitably doomed to wounds and deathamazed Pierre."They may die tomorrow; why are they thinking of anything but death?"And by some latent sequence of thought the descent of the Mozhaysk hill,the carts with the wounded, the ringing bells, the slanting rays of thesun, and the songs of the cavalrymen vividly recurred to his mind."The cavalry ride to battle and meet the wounded and do not for a momentthink of what awaits them, but pass by, winking at the wounded. Yet fromamong these men twenty thousand are doomed to die, and they wonder at myhat! Strange!" thought Pierre, continuing his way to Tatarinova.In front of a landowner's house to the left of the road stood carriages,wagons, and crowds of orderlies and sentinels. The commander-in-chiefwas putting up there, but just when Pierre arrived he was not in andhardly any of the staff were there--they had gone to the church service.Pierre drove on toward Gorki.When he had ascended the hill and reached the little village street, hesaw for the first time peasant militiamen in their white shirts and withcrosses on their caps, who, talking and laughing loudly, animated andperspiring, were at work on a huge knoll overgrown with grass to theright of the road.Some of them were digging, others were wheeling barrowloads of earthalong planks, while others stood about doing nothing.Two officers were standing on the knoll, directing the men. On seeingthese peasants, who were evidently still amused by the novelty of theirposition as soldiers, Pierre once more thought of the wounded men atMozhaysk and understood what the soldier had meant when he said: "Theywant the whole nation to fall on them." The sight of these beardedpeasants at work on the battlefield, with their queer, clumsy boots andperspiring necks, and their shirts opening from the left toward themiddle, unfastened, exposing their sunburned collarbones, impressedPierre more strongly with the solemnity and importance of the momentthan anything he had yet seen or heard.CHAPTER XXIPierre stepped out of his carriage and, passing the toiling militiamen,ascended the knoll from which, according to the doctor, the battlefieldcould be seen.It was about eleven o'clock. The sun shone somewhat to the left andbehind him and brightly lit up the enormous panorama which, rising likean amphitheater, extended before him in the clear rarefied atmosphere.From above on the left, bisecting that amphitheater, wound the Smolenskhighroad, passing through a village with a white church some fivehundred paces in front of the knoll and below it. This was Borodino.Below the village the road crossed the river by a bridge and, windingdown and up, rose higher and higher to the village of Valuevo visibleabout four miles away, where Napoleon was then stationed. Beyond Valuevothe road disappeared into a yellowing forest on the horizon. Far in thedistance in that birch and fir forest to the right of the road, thecross and belfry of the Kolocha Monastery gleamed in the sun. Here andthere over the whole of that blue expanse, to right and left of theforest and the road, smoking campfires could be seen and indefinitemasses of troops--ours and the enemy's. The ground to the right--alongthe course of the Kolocha and Moskva rivers--was broken and hilly.Between the hollows the villages of Bezubova and Zakharino showed in thedistance. On the left the ground was more level; there were fields ofgrain, and the smoking ruins of Semenovsk, which had been burned down,could be seen.All that Pierre saw was so indefinite that neither the left nor theright side of the field fully satisfied his expectations. Nowhere couldhe see the battlefield he had expected to find, but only fields,meadows, troops, woods, the smoke of campfires, villages, mounds, andstreams; and try as he would he could descry no military "position" inthis place which teemed with life, nor could he even distinguish ourtroops from the enemy's."I must ask someone who knows," he thought, and addressed an officer whowas looking with curiosity at his huge unmilitary figure."May I ask you," said Pierre, "what village that is in front?""Burdino, isn't it?" said the officer, turning to his companion."Borodino," the other corrected him.The officer, evidently glad of an opportunity for a talk, moved up toPierre."Are those our men there?" Pierre inquired."Yes, and there, further on, are the French," said the officer. "Therethey are, there... you can see them.""Where? Where?" asked Pierre."One can see them with the naked eye... Why, there!"The officer pointed with his hand to the smoke visible on the leftbeyond the river, and the same stern and serious expression that Pierrehad noticed on many of the faces he had met came into his face."Ah, those are the French! And over there?..." Pierre pointed to a knollon the left, near which some troops could be seen."Those are ours.""Ah, ours! And there?..." Pierre pointed to another knoll in thedistance with a big tree on it, near a village that lay in a hollowwhere also some campfires were smoking and something black was visible."That's his again," said the officer. (It was the Shevardino Redoubt.)"It was ours yesterday, but now it is his.""Then how about our position?""Our position?" replied the officer with a smile of satisfaction. "I cantell you quite clearly, because I constructed nearly all ourentrenchments. There, you see? There's our center, at Borodino, justthere," and he pointed to the village in front of them with the whitechurch. "That's where one crosses the Kolocha. You see down there wherethe rows of hay are lying in the hollow, there's the bridge. That's ourcenter. Our right flank is over there"--he pointed sharply to the right,far away in the broken ground--"That's where the Moskva River is, and wehave thrown up three redoubts there, very strong ones. The leftflank..." here the officer paused. "Well, you see, that's difficult toexplain.... Yesterday our left flank was there at Shevardino, you see,where the oak is, but now we have withdrawn our left wing--now it isover there, do you see that village and the smoke? That's Semenovsk,yes, there," he pointed to Raevski's knoll. "But the battle will hardlybe there. His having moved his troops there is only a ruse; he willprobably pass round to the right of the Moskva. But wherever it may be,many a man will be missing tomorrow!" he remarked.An elderly sergeant who had approached the officer while he was givingthese explanations had waited in silence for him to finish speaking, butat this point, evidently not liking the officer's remark, interruptedhim."Gabions must be sent for," said he sternly.The officer appeared abashed, as though he understood that one mightthink of how many men would be missing tomorrow but ought not to speakof it."Well, send number three company again," the officer replied hurriedly."And you, are you one of the doctors?""No, I've come on my own," answered Pierre, and he went down the hillagain, passing the militiamen."Oh, those damned fellows!" muttered the officer who followed him,holding his nose as he ran past the men at work."There they are... bringing her, coming... There they are... They'll behere in a minute..." voices were suddenly heard saying; and officers,soldiers, and militiamen began running forward along the road.A church procession was coming up the hill from Borodino. First alongthe dusty road came the infantry in ranks, bareheaded and with armsreversed. From behind them came the sound of church singing.Soldiers and militiamen ran bareheaded past Pierre toward theprocession."They are bringing her, our Protectress!... The Iberian Mother of God!"someone cried."The Smolensk Mother of God," another corrected him.The militiamen, both those who had been in the village and those who hadbeen at work on the battery, threw down their spades and ran to meet thechurch procession. Following the battalion that marched along the dustyroad came priests in their vestments--one little old man in a hood withattendants and singers. Behind them soldiers and officers bore a large,dark-faced icon with an embossed metal cover. This was the icon that hadbeen brought from Smolensk and had since accompanied the army. Behind,before, and on both sides, crowds of militiamen with bared heads walked,ran, and bowed to the ground.At the summit of the hill they stopped with the icon; the men who hadbeen holding it up by the linen bands attached to it were relieved byothers, the chanters relit their censers, and service began. The hotrays of the sun beat down vertically and a fresh soft wind played withthe hair of the bared heads and with the ribbons decorating the icon.The singing did not sound loud under the open sky. An immense crowd ofbareheaded officers, soldiers, and militiamen surrounded the icon.Behind the priest and a chanter stood the notabilities on a spotreserved for them. A bald general with a St. George's Cross on his neckstood just behind the priest's back, and without crossing himself (hewas evidently a German) patiently awaited the end of the service, whichhe considered it necessary to hear to the end, probably to arouse thepatriotism of the Russian people. Another general stood in a martialpose, crossing himself by shaking his hand in front of his chest whilelooking about him. Standing among the crowd of peasants, Pierrerecognized several acquaintances among these notables, but did not lookat them--his whole attention was absorbed in watching the seriousexpression on the faces of the crowd of soldiers and militiamen who wereall gazing eagerly at the icon. As soon as the tired chanters, who weresinging the service for the twentieth time that day, began lazily andmechanically to sing: "Save from calamity Thy servants, O Mother ofGod," and the priest and deacon chimed in: "For to Thee under God we allflee as to an inviolable bulwark and protection," there again kindled inall those faces the same expression of consciousness of the solemnity ofthe impending moment that Pierre had seen on the faces at the foot ofthe hill at Mozhaysk and momentarily on many and many faces he had metthat morning; and heads were bowed more frequently and hair tossed back,and sighs and the sound men made as they crossed themselves were heard.The crowd round the icon suddenly parted and pressed against Pierre.Someone, a very important personage judging by the haste with which waywas made for him, was approaching the icon.It was Kutuzov, who had been riding round the position and on his wayback to Tatarinova had stopped where the service was being held. Pierrerecognized him at once by his peculiar figure, which distinguished himfrom everybody else.With a long overcoat on his exceedingly stout, round-shouldered body,with uncovered white head and puffy face showing the white ball of theeye he had lost, Kutuzov walked with plunging, swaying gait into thecrowd and stopped behind the priest. He crossed himself with anaccustomed movement, bent till he touched the ground with his hand, andbowed his white head with a deep sigh. Behind Kutuzov was Bennigsen andthe suite. Despite the presence of the commander-in-chief, who attractedthe attention of all the superior officers, the militiamen and soldierscontinued their prayers without looking at him.When the service was over, Kutuzov stepped up to the icon, sank heavilyto his knees, bowed to the ground, and for a long time tried vainly torise, but could not do so on account of his weakness and weight. Hiswhite head twitched with the effort. At last he rose, kissed the icon asa child does with naively pouting lips, and again bowed till he touchedthe ground with his hand. The other generals followed his example, thenthe officers, and after them with excited faces, pressing on oneanother, crowding, panting, and pushing, scrambled the soldiers andmilitiamen.CHAPTER XXIIStaggering amid the crush, Pierre looked about him."Count Peter Kirilovich! How did you get here?" said a voice.Pierre looked round. Boris Drubetskoy, brushing his knees with his hand(he had probably soiled them when he, too, had knelt before the icon),came up to him smiling. Boris was elegantly dressed, with a slightlymartial touch appropriate to a campaign. He wore a long coat and likeKutuzov had a whip slung across his shoulder.Meanwhile Kutuzov had reached the village and seated himself in theshade of the nearest house, on a bench which one Cossack had run tofetch and another had hastily covered with a rug. An immense andbrilliant suite surrounded him.The icon was carried further, accompanied by the throng. Pierre stoppedsome thirty paces from Kutuzov, talking to Boris.He explained his wish to be present at the battle and to see theposition."This is what you must do," said Boris. "I will do the honors of thecamp to you. You will see everything best from where Count Bennigsenwill be. I am in attendance on him, you know; I'll mention it to him.But if you want to ride round the position, come along with us. We arejust going to the left flank. Then when we get back, do spend the nightwith me and we'll arrange a game of cards. Of course you know DmitriSergeevich? Those are his quarters," and he pointed to the third housein the village of Gorki."But I should like to see the right flank. They say it's very strong,"said Pierre. "I should like to start from the Moskva River and rideround the whole position.""Well, you can do that later, but the chief thing is the left flank.""Yes, yes. But where is Prince Bolkonski's regiment? Can you point itout to me?""Prince Andrew's? We shall pass it and I'll take you to him.""What about the left flank?" asked Pierre"To tell you the truth, between ourselves, God only knows what state ourleft flank is in," said Boris confidentially lowering his voice. "It isnot at all what Count Bennigsen intended. He meant to fortify that knollquite differently, but..." Boris shrugged his shoulders, "his SereneHighness would not have it, or someone persuaded him. You see..." butBoris did not finish, for at that moment Kaysarov, Kutuzov's adjutant,came up to Pierre. "Ah, Kaysarov!" said Boris, addressing him with anunembarrassed smile, "I was just trying to explain our position to thecount. It is amazing how his Serene Highness could so foresee theintentions of the French!""You mean the left flank?" asked Kaysarov."Yes, exactly; the left flank is now extremely strong."Though Kutuzov had dismissed all unnecessary men from the staff, Borishad contrived to remain at headquarters after the changes. He hadestablished himself with Count Bennigsen, who, like all on whom Borishad been in attendance, considered young Prince Drubetskoy an invaluableman.In the higher command there were two sharply defined parties: Kutuzov'sparty and that of Bennigsen, the chief of staff. Boris belonged to thelatter and no one else, while showing servile respect to Kutuzov, couldso create an impression that the old fellow was not much good and thatBennigsen managed everything. Now the decisive moment of battle had comewhen Kutuzov would be destroyed and the power pass to Bennigsen, or evenif Kutuzov won the battle it would be felt that everything was done byBennigsen. In any case many great rewards would have to be given fortomorrow's action, and new men would come to the front. So Boris wasfull of nervous vivacity all day.After Kaysarov, others whom Pierre knew came up to him, and he had nottime to reply to all the questions about Moscow that were showered uponhim, or to listen to all that was told him. The faces all expressedanimation and apprehension, but it seemed to Pierre that the cause ofthe excitement shown in some of these faces lay chiefly in questions ofpersonal success; his mind, however, was occupied by the differentexpression he saw on other faces--an expression that spoke not ofpersonal matters but of the universal questions of life and death.Kutuzov noticed Pierre's figure and the group gathered round him."Call him to me," said Kutuzov.An adjutant told Pierre of his Serene Highness' wish, and Pierre wenttoward Kutuzov's bench. But a militiaman got there before him. It wasDolokhov."How did that fellow get here?" asked Pierre."He's a creature that wriggles in anywhere!" was the answer. "He hasbeen degraded, you know. Now he wants to bob up again. He's beenproposing some scheme or other and has crawled into the enemy's picketline at night.... He's a brave fellow."Pierre took off his hat and bowed respectfully to Kutuzov."I concluded that if I reported to your Serene Highness you might sendme away or say that you knew what I was reporting, but then I shouldn'tlose anything..." Dolokhov was saying."Yes, yes.""But if I were right, I should be rendering a service to my Fatherlandfor which I am ready to die.""Yes, yes.""And should your Serene Highness require a man who will not spare hisskin, please think of me.... Perhaps I may prove useful to your SereneHighness.""Yes... Yes..." Kutuzov repeated, his laughing eye narrowing more andmore as he looked at Pierre.Just then Boris, with his courtierlike adroitness, stepped up toPierre's side near Kutuzov and in a most natural manner, without raisinghis voice, said to Pierre, as though continuing an interruptedconversation:"The militia have put on clean white shirts to be ready to die. Whatheroism, Count!"Boris evidently said this to Pierre in order to be overheard by hisSerene Highness. He knew Kutuzov's attention would be caught by thosewords, and so it was."What are you saying about the militia?" he asked Boris."Preparing for tomorrow, your Serene Highness--for death--they have puton clean shirts.""Ah... a wonderful, a matchless people!" said Kutuzov; and he closed hiseyes and swayed his head. "A matchless people!" he repeated with a sigh."So you want to smell gunpowder?" he said to Pierre. "Yes, it's apleasant smell. I have the honor to be one of your wife's adorers. Isshe well? My quarters are at your service."And as often happens with old people, Kutuzov began looking aboutabsent-mindedly as if forgetting all he wanted to say or do.Then, evidently remembering what he wanted, he beckoned to AndrewKaysarov, his adjutant's brother."Those verses... those verses of Marin's... how do they go, eh? Those hewrote about Gerakov: 'Lectures for the corps inditing'... Recite them,recite them!" said he, evidently preparing to laugh.Kaysarov recited.... Kutuzov smilingly nodded his head to the rhythm ofthe verses.When Pierre had left Kutuzov, Dolokhov came up to him and took his hand."I am very glad to meet you here, Count," he said aloud, regardless ofthe presence of strangers and in a particularly resolute and solemntone. "On the eve of a day when God alone knows who of us is fated tosurvive, I am glad of this opportunity to tell you that I regret themisunderstandings that occurred between us and should wish you not tohave any ill feeling for me. I beg you to forgive me."Pierre looked at Dolokhov with a smile, not knowing what to say to him.With tears in his eyes Dolokhov embraced Pierre and kissed him.Boris said a few words to his general, and Count Bennigsen turned toPierre and proposed that he should ride with him along the line."It will interest you," said he."Yes, very much," replied Pierre.Half an hour later Kutuzov left for Tatarinova, and Bennigsen and hissuite, with Pierre among them, set out on their ride along the line.CHAPTER XXIIIFrom Gorki, Bennigsen descended the highroad to the bridge which, whenthey had looked at it from the hill, the officer had pointed out asbeing the center of our position and where rows of fragrant new-mown haylay by the riverside. They rode across that bridge into the village ofBorodino and thence turned to the left, passing an enormous number oftroops and guns, and came to a high knoll where militiamen were digging.This was the redoubt, as yet unnamed, which afterwards became known asthe Raevski Redoubt, or the Knoll Battery, but Pierre paid no specialattention to it. He did not know that it would become more memorable tohim than any other spot on the plain of Borodino.They then crossed the hollow to Semenovsk, where the soldiers weredragging away the last logs from the huts and barns. Then they rodedownhill and uphill, across a ryefield trodden and beaten down as if byhail, following a track freshly made by the artillery over the furrowsof the plowed land, and reached some fleches * which were still beingdug.* A kind of entrenchment.At the fleches Bennigsen stopped and began looking at the ShevardinoRedoubt opposite, which had been ours the day before and where severalhorsemen could be descried. The officers said that either Napoleon orMurat was there, and they all gazed eagerly at this little group ofhorsemen. Pierre also looked at them, trying to guess which of thescarcely discernible figures was Napoleon. At last those mounted menrode away from the mound and disappeared.Bennigsen spoke to a general who approached him, and began explainingthe whole position of our troops. Pierre listened to him, straining eachfaculty to understand the essential points of the impending battle, butwas mortified to feel that his mental capacity was inadequate for thetask. He could make nothing of it. Bennigsen stopped speaking and,noticing that Pierre was listening, suddenly said to him:"I don't think this interests you?""On the contrary it's very interesting!" replied Pierre not quitetruthfully.From the fleches they rode still farther to the left, along a roadwinding through a thick, low-growing birch wood. In the middle of thewood a brown hare with white feet sprang out and, scared by the tramp ofthe many horses, grew so confused that it leaped along the road in frontof them for some time, arousing general attention and laughter, and onlywhen several voices shouted at it did it dart to one side and disappearin the thicket. After going through the wood for about a mile and a halfthey came out on a glade where troops of Tuchkov's corps were stationedto defend the left flank.Here, at the extreme left flank, Bennigsen talked a great deal and withmuch heat, and, as it seemed to Pierre, gave orders of great militaryimportance. In front of Tuchkov's troops was some high ground notoccupied by troops. Bennigsen loudly criticized this mistake, sayingthat it was madness to leave a height which commanded the country aroundunoccupied and to place troops below it. Some of the generals expressedthe same opinion. One in particular declared with martial heat that theywere put there to be slaughtered. Bennigsen on his own authority orderedthe troops to occupy the high ground. This disposition on the left flankincreased Pierre's doubt of his own capacity to understand militarymatters. Listening to Bennigsen and the generals criticizing theposition of the troops behind the hill, he quite understood them andshared their opinion, but for that very reason he could not understandhow the man who put them there behind the hill could have made so grossand palpable a blunder.Pierre did not know that these troops were not, as Bennigsen supposed,put there to defend the position, but were in a concealed position as anambush, that they should not be seen and might be able to strike anapproaching enemy unexpectedly. Bennigsen did not know this and movedthe troops forward according to his own ideas without mentioning thematter to the commander-in-chief.CHAPTER XXIVOn that bright evening of August 25, Prince Andrew lay leaning on hiselbow in a broken-down shed in the village of Knyazkovo at the furtherend of his regiment's encampment. Through a gap in the broken wall hecould see, beside the wooden fence, a row of thirty year-old bircheswith their lower branches lopped off, a field on which shocks of oatswere standing, and some bushes near which rose the smoke of campfires--the soldiers' kitchens.Narrow and burdensome and useless to anyone as his life now seemed tohim, Prince Andrew on the eve of battle felt agitated and irritable ashe had done seven years before at Austerlitz.He had received and given the orders for next day's battle and hadnothing more to do. But his thoughts--the simplest, clearest, andtherefore most terrible thoughts--would give him no peace. He knew thattomorrow's battle would be the most terrible of all he had taken partin, and for the first time in his life the possibility of deathpresented itself to him--not in relation to any worldly matter or withreference to its effect on others, but simply in relation to himself, tohis own soul--vividly, plainly, terribly, and almost as a certainty. Andfrom the height of this perception all that had previously tormented andpreoccupied him suddenly became illumined by a cold white light withoutshadows, without perspective, without distinction of outline. All lifeappeared to him like magic-lantern pictures at which he had long beengazing by artificial light through a glass. Now he suddenly saw thosebadly daubed pictures in clear daylight and without a glass. "Yes, yes!There they are, those false images that agitated, enraptured, andtormented me," said he to himself, passing in review the principalpictures of the magic lantern of life and regarding them now in the coldwhite daylight of his clear perception of death. "There they are, thoserudely painted figures that once seemed splendid and mysterious. Glory,the good of society, love of a woman, the Fatherland itself--howimportant these pictures appeared to me, with what profound meaning theyseemed to be filled! And it is all so simple, pale, and crude in thecold white light of this morning which I feel is dawning for me." Thethree great sorrows of his life held his attention in particular: hislove for a woman, his father's death, and the French invasion which hadoverrun half Russia. "Love... that little girl who seemed to me brimmingover with mystic forces! Yes, indeed, I loved her. I made romantic plansof love and happiness with her! Oh, what a boy I was!" he said aloudbitterly. "Ah me! I believed in some ideal love which was to keep herfaithful to me for the whole year of my absence! Like the gentle dove inthe fable she was to pine apart from me.... But it was much simplerreally.... It was all very simple and horrible.""When my father built Bald Hills he thought the place was his: his land,his air, his peasants. But Napoleon came and swept him aside,unconscious of his existence, as he might brush a chip from his path,and his Bald Hills and his whole life fell to pieces. Princess Mary saysit is a trial sent from above. What is the trial for, when he is nothere and will never return? He is not here! For whom then is the trialintended? The Fatherland, the destruction of Moscow! And tomorrow Ishall be killed, perhaps not even by a Frenchman but by one of our ownmen, by a soldier discharging a musket close to my ear as one of themdid yesterday, and the French will come and take me by head and heelsand fling me into a hole that I may not stink under their noses, and newconditions of life will arise, which will seem quite ordinary to othersand about which I shall know nothing. I shall not exist..."He looked at the row of birches shining in the sunshine, with theirmotionless green and yellow foliage and white bark. "To die... to bekilled tomorrow... That I should not exist... That all this should stillbe, but no me...."And the birches with their light and shade, the curly clouds, the smokeof the campfires, and all that was around him changed and seemedterrible and menacing. A cold shiver ran down his spine. He rosequickly, went out of the shed, and began to walk about.After he had returned, voices were heard outside the shed. "Who's that?"he cried.The red-nosed Captain Timokhin, formerly Dolokhov's squadron commander,but now from lack of officers a battalion commander, shyly entered theshed followed by an adjutant and the regimental paymaster.Prince Andrew rose hastily, listened to the business they had comeabout, gave them some further instructions, and was about to dismissthem when he heard a familiar, lisping, voice behind the shed."Devil take it!" said the voice of a man stumbling over something.Prince Andrew looked out of the shed and saw Pierre, who had trippedover a pole on the ground and had nearly fallen, coming his way. It wasunpleasant to Prince Andrew to meet people of his own set in general,and Pierre especially, for he reminded him of all the painful moments ofhis last visit to Moscow."You? What a surprise!" said he. "What brings you here? This isunexpected!"As he said this his eyes and face expressed more than coldness--theyexpressed hostility, which Pierre noticed at once. He had approached theshed full of animation, but on seeing Prince Andrew's face he feltconstrained and ill at ease."I have come... simply... you know... come... it interests me," saidPierre, who had so often that day senselessly repeated that word"interesting." "I wish to see the battle.""Oh yes, and what do the masonic brothers say about war? How would theystop it?" said Prince Andrew sarcastically. "Well, and how's Moscow? Andmy people? Have they reached Moscow at last?" he asked seriously."Yes, they have. Julie Drubetskaya told me so. I went to see them, butmissed them. They have gone to your estate near Moscow."CHAPTER XXVThe officers were about to take leave, but Prince Andrew, apparentlyreluctant to be left alone with his friend, asked them to stay and havetea. Seats were brought in and so was the tea. The officers gazed withsurprise at Pierre's huge stout figure and listened to his talk ofMoscow and the position of our army, round which he had ridden. PrinceAndrew remained silent, and his expression was so forbidding that Pierreaddressed his remarks chiefly to the good-natured battalion commander."So you understand the whole position of our troops?" Prince Andrewinterrupted him."Yes--that is, how do you mean?" said Pierre. "Not being a military manI can't say I have understood it fully, but I understand the generalposition.""Well, then, you know more than anyone else, be it who it may," saidPrince Andrew."Oh!" said Pierre, looking over his spectacles in perplexity at PrinceAndrew. "Well, and what do you think of Kutuzov's appointment?" heasked."I was very glad of his appointment, that's all I know," replied PrinceAndrew."And tell me your opinion of Barclay de Tolly. In Moscow they are sayingheaven knows what about him.... What do you think of him?""Ask them," replied Prince Andrew, indicating the officers.Pierre looked at Timokhin with the condescendingly interrogative smilewith which everybody involuntarily addressed that officer."We see light again, since his Serenity has been appointed, yourexcellency," said Timokhin timidly, and continually turning to glance athis colonel."Why so?" asked Pierre."Well, to mention only firewood and fodder, let me inform you. Why, whenwe were retreating from Sventsyani we dare not touch a stick or a wispof hay or anything. You see, we were going away, so he would get it all;wasn't it so, your excellency?" and again Timokhin turned to the prince."But we daren't. In our regiment two officers were court-martialed forthat kind of thing. But when his Serenity took command everything becamestraight forward. Now we see light...""Then why was it forbidden?"Timokhin looked about in confusion, not knowing what or how to answersuch a question. Pierre put the same question to Prince Andrew."Why, so as not to lay waste the country we were abandoning to theenemy," said Prince Andrew with venomous irony. "It is very sound: onecan't permit the land to be pillaged and accustom the troops tomarauding. At Smolensk too he judged correctly that the French mightoutflank us, as they had larger forces. But he could not understandthis," cried Prince Andrew in a shrill voice that seemed to escape himinvoluntarily: "he could not understand that there, for the first time,we were fighting for Russian soil, and that there was a spirit in themen such as I had never seen before, that we had held the French for twodays, and that that success had increased our strength tenfold. Heordered us to retreat, and all our efforts and losses went for nothing.He had no thought of betraying us, he tried to do the best he could, hethought out everything, and that is why he is unsuitable. He isunsuitable now, just because he plans out everything very thoroughly andaccurately as every German has to. How can I explain?... Well, say yourfather has a German valet, and he is a splendid valet and satisfies yourfather's requirements better than you could, then it's all right to lethim serve. But if your father is mortally sick you'll send the valetaway and attend to your father with your own unpracticed, awkward hands,and will soothe him better than a skilled man who is a stranger could.So it has been with Barclay. While Russia was well, a foreigner couldserve her and be a splendid minister; but as soon as she is in dangershe needs one of her own kin. But in your club they have been making himout a traitor! They slander him as a traitor, and the only result willbe that afterwards, ashamed of their false accusations, they will makehim out a hero or a genius instead of a traitor, and that will be stillmore unjust. He is an honest and very punctilious German.""And they say he's a skillful commander," rejoined Pierre."I don't understand what is meant by 'a skillful commander,'" repliedPrince Andrew ironically."A skillful commander?" replied Pierre. "Why, one who foresees allcontingencies... and foresees the adversary's intentions.""But that's impossible," said Prince Andrew as if it were a mattersettled long ago.Pierre looked at him in surprise."And yet they say that war is like a game of chess?" he remarked."Yes," replied Prince Andrew, "but with this little difference, that inchess you may think over each move as long as you please and are notlimited for time, and with this difference too, that a knight is alwaysstronger than a pawn, and two pawns are always stronger than one, whilein war a battalion is sometimes stronger than a division and sometimesweaker than a company. The relative strength of bodies of troops cannever be known to anyone. Believe me," he went on, "if things dependedon arrangements made by the staff, I should be there makingarrangements, but instead of that I have the honor to serve here in theregiment with these gentlemen, and I consider that on us tomorrow'sbattle will depend and not on those others.... Success never depends,and never will depend, on position, or equipment, or even on numbers,and least of all on position.""But on what then?""On the feeling that is in me and in him," he pointed to Timokhin, "andin each soldier."Prince Andrew glanced at Timokhin, who looked at his commander in alarmand bewilderment. In contrast to his former reticent taciturnity PrinceAndrew now seemed excited. He could apparently not refrain fromexpressing the thoughts that had suddenly occurred to him."A battle is won by those who firmly resolve to win it! Why did we losethe battle at Austerlitz? The French losses were almost equal to ours,but very early we said to ourselves that we were losing the battle, andwe did lose it. And we said so because we had nothing to fight forthere, we wanted to get away from the battlefield as soon as we could.'We've lost, so let us run,' and we ran. If we had not said that tillthe evening, heaven knows what might not have happened. But tomorrow weshan't say it! You talk about our position, the left flank weak and theright flank too extended," he went on. "That's all nonsense, there'snothing of the kind. But what awaits us tomorrow? A hundred million mostdiverse chances which will be decided on the instant by the fact thatour men or theirs run or do not run, and that this man or that man iskilled, but all that is being done at present is only play. The fact isthat those men with whom you have ridden round the position not only donot help matters, but hinder. They are only concerned with their ownpetty interests.""At such a moment?" said Pierre reproachfully."At such a moment!" Prince Andrew repeated. "To them it is only a momentaffording opportunities to undermine a rival and obtain an extra crossor ribbon. For me tomorrow means this: a Russian army of a hundredthousand and a French army of a hundred thousand have met to fight, andthe thing is that these two hundred thousand men will fight and the sidethat fights more fiercely and spares itself least will win. And if youlike I will tell you that whatever happens and whatever muddles those atthe top may make, we shall win tomorrow's battle. Tomorrow, happen whatmay, we shall win!""There now, your excellency! That's the truth, the real truth," saidTimokhin. "Who would spare himself now? The soldiers in my battalion,believe me, wouldn't drink their vodka! 'It's not the day for that!'they say."All were silent. The officers rose. Prince Andrew went out of the shedwith them, giving final orders to the adjutant. After they had gonePierre approached Prince Andrew and was about to start a conversationwhen they heard the clatter of three horses' hoofs on the road not farfrom the shed, and looking in that direction Prince Andrew recognizedWolzogen and Clausewitz accompanied by a Cossack. They rode close bycontinuing to converse, and Prince Andrew involuntarily heard thesewords:"Der Krieg muss in Raum verlegt werden. Der Ansicht kann ich nicht genugPreis geben," * said one of them.* "The war must be extended widely. I cannot sufficiently commend thatview.""Oh, ja," said the other, "der Zweck ist nur den Feind zu schwchen, sokann man gewiss nicht den Verlust der Privat-Personen in Achtungnehmen." ** "Oh, yes, the only aim is to weaken the enemy, so of course one cannottake into account the loss of private individuals.""Oh, no," agreed the other."Extend widely!" said Prince Andrew with an angry snort, when they hadridden past. "In that 'extend' were my father, son, and sister, at BaldHills. That's all the same to him! That's what I was saying to you--those German gentlemen won't win the battle tomorrow but will only makeall the mess they can, because they have nothing in their German headsbut theories not worth an empty eggshell and haven't in their hearts theone thing needed tomorrow--that which Timokhin has. They have yielded upall Europe to him, and have now come to teach us. Fine teachers!" andagain his voice grew shrill."So you think we shall win tomorrow's battle?" asked Pierre."Yes, yes," answered Prince Andrew absently. "One thing I would do if Ihad the power," he began again, "I would not take prisoners. Why takeprisoners? It's chivalry! The French have destroyed my home and are ontheir way to destroy Moscow, they have outraged and are outraging meevery moment. They are my enemies. In my opinion they are all criminals.And so thinks Timokhin and the whole army. They should be executed!Since they are my foes they cannot be my friends, whatever may have beensaid at Tilsit.""Yes, yes," muttered Pierre, looking with shining eyes at Prince Andrew."I quite agree with you!"The question that had perturbed Pierre on the Mozhaysk hill and all thatday now seemed to him quite clear and completely solved. He nowunderstood the whole meaning and importance of this war and of theimpending battle. All he had seen that day, all the significant andstern expressions on the faces he had seen in passing, were lit up forhim by a new light. He understood that latent heat (as they say inphysics) of patriotism which was present in all these men he had seen,and this explained to him why they all prepared for death calmly, and asit were lightheartedly."Not take prisoners," Prince Andrew continued: "That by itself wouldquite change the whole war and make it less cruel. As it is we haveplayed at war--that's what's vile! We play at magnanimity and all thatstuff. Such magnanimity and sensibility are like the magnanimity andsensibility of a lady who faints when she sees a calf being killed: sheis so kindhearted that she can't look at blood, but enjoys eating thecalf served up with sauce. They talk to us of the rules of war, ofchivalry, of flags of truce, of mercy to the unfortunate and so on. It'sall rubbish! I saw chivalry and flags of truce in 1805; they humbuggedus and we humbugged them. They plunder other people's houses, issuefalse paper money, and worst of all they kill my children and my father,and then talk of rules of war and magnanimity to foes! Take noprisoners, but kill and be killed! He who has come to this as I havethrough the same sufferings..."Prince Andrew, who had thought it was all the same to him whether or notMoscow was taken as Smolensk had been, was suddenly checked in hisspeech by an unexpected cramp in his throat. He paced up and down a fewtimes in silence, but his eyes glittered feverishly and his lipsquivered as he began speaking."If there was none of this magnanimity in war, we should go to war onlywhen it was worth while going to certain death, as now. Then there wouldnot be war because Paul Ivanovich had offended Michael Ivanovich. Andwhen there was a war, like this one, it would be war! And then thedetermination of the troops would be quite different. Then all theseWestphalians and Hessians whom Napoleon is leading would not follow himinto Russia, and we should not go to fight in Austria and Prussiawithout knowing why. War is not courtesy but the most horrible thing inlife; and we ought to understand that and not play at war. We ought toaccept this terrible necessity sternly and seriously. It all lies inthat: get rid of falsehood and let war be war and not a game. As it isnow, war is the favorite pastime of the idle and frivolous. The militarycalling is the most highly honored."But what is war? What is needed for success in warfare? What are thehabits of the military? The aim of war is murder; the methods of war arespying, treachery, and their encouragement, the ruin of a country'sinhabitants, robbing them or stealing to provision the army, and fraudand falsehood termed military craft. The habits of the military classare the absence of freedom, that is, discipline, idleness, ignorance,cruelty, debauchery, and drunkenness. And in spite of all this it is thehighest class, respected by everyone. All the kings, except the Chinese,wear military uniforms, and he who kills most people receives thehighest rewards."They meet, as we shall meet tomorrow, to murder one another; they killand maim tens of thousands, and then have thanksgiving services forhaving killed so many people (they even exaggerate the number), and theyannounce a victory, supposing that the more people they have killed thegreater their achievement. How does God above look at them and hearthem?" exclaimed Prince Andrew in a shrill, piercing voice. "Ah, myfriend, it has of late become hard for me to live. I see that I havebegun to understand too much. And it doesn't do for man to taste of thetree of knowledge of good and evil.... Ah, well, it's not for long!" headded."However, you're sleepy, and it's time for me to sleep. Go back toGorki!" said Prince Andrew suddenly."Oh no!" Pierre replied, looking at Prince Andrew with frightened,compassionate eyes."Go, go! Before a battle one must have one's sleep out," repeated PrinceAndrew.He came quickly up to Pierre and embraced and kissed him. "Good-bye, beoff!" he shouted. "Whether we meet again or not..." and turning awayhurriedly he entered the shed.It was already dark, and Pierre could not make out whether theexpression of Prince Andrew's face was angry or tender.For some time he stood in silence considering whether he should followhim or go away. "No, he does not want it!" Pierre concluded. "And I knowthat this is our last meeting!" He sighed deeply and rode back to Gorki.On re-entering the shed Prince Andrew lay down on a rug, but he couldnot sleep.He closed his eyes. One picture succeeded another in his imagination. Onone of them he dwelt long and joyfully. He vividly recalled an eveningin Petersburg. Natasha with animated and excited face was telling himhow she had gone to look for mushrooms the previous summer and had losther way in the big forest. She incoherently described the depths of theforest, her feelings, and a talk with a beekeeper she met, andconstantly interrupted her story to say: "No, I can't! I'm not tellingit right; no, you don't understand," though he encouraged her by sayingthat he did understand, and he really had understood all she wanted tosay. But Natasha was not satisfied with her own words: she felt thatthey did not convey the passionately poetic feeling she had experiencedthat day and wished to convey. "He was such a delightful old man, and itwas so dark in the forest... and he had such kind... No, I can'tdescribe it," she had said, flushed and excited. Prince Andrew smilednow the same happy smile as then when he had looked into her eyes. "Iunderstood her," he thought. "I not only understood her, but it was justthat inner, spiritual force, that sincerity, that frankness of soul--that very soul of hers which seemed to be fettered by her body--it wasthat soul I loved in her... loved so strongly and happily..." andsuddenly he remembered how his love had ended. "He did not need anythingof that kind. He neither saw nor understood anything of the sort. Heonly saw in her a pretty and fresh young girl, with whom he did notdeign to unite his fate. And I?... and he is still alive and gay!"Prince Andrew jumped up as if someone had burned him, and again beganpacing up and down in front of the shed.CHAPTER XXVIOn August 25, the eve of the battle of Borodino, M. de Beausset, prefectof the French Emperor's palace, arrived at Napoleon's quarters atValuevo with Colonel Fabvier, the former from Paris and the latter fromMadrid.Donning his court uniform, M. de Beausset ordered a box he had broughtfor the Emperor to be carried before him and entered the firstcompartment of Napoleon's tent, where he began opening the box whileconversing with Napoleon's aides-de-camp who surrounded him.Fabvier, not entering the tent, remained at the entrance talking to somegenerals of his acquaintance.The Emperor Napoleon had not yet left his bedroom and was finishing histoilet. Slightly snorting and grunting, he presented now his back andnow his plump hairy chest to the brush with which his valet was rubbinghim down. Another valet, with his finger over the mouth of a bottle, wassprinkling Eau de Cologne on the Emperor's pampered body with anexpression which seemed to say that he alone knew where and how much Eaude Cologne should be sprinkled. Napoleon's short hair was wet and mattedon the forehead, but his face, though puffy and yellow, expressedphysical satisfaction. "Go on, harder, go on!" he muttered to the valetwho was rubbing him, slightly twitching and grunting. An aide-de-camp,who had entered the bedroom to report to the Emperor the number ofprisoners taken in yesterday's action, was standing by the door afterdelivering his message, awaiting permission to withdraw. Napoleon,frowning, looked at him from under his brows."No prisoners!" said he, repeating the aide-de-camp's words. "They areforcing us to exterminate them. So much the worse for the Russianarmy.... Go on... harder, harder!" he muttered, hunching his back andpresenting his fat shoulders."All right. Let Monsieur de Beausset enter, and Fabvier too," he said,nodding to the aide-de-camp."Yes, sire," and the aide-de-camp disappeared through the door of thetent.Two valets rapidly dressed His Majesty, and wearing the blue uniform ofthe Guards he went with firm quick steps to the reception room.De Beausset's hands meanwhile were busily engaged arranging the presenthe had brought from the Empress, on two chairs directly in front of theentrance. But Napoleon had dressed and come out with such unexpectedrapidity that he had not time to finish arranging the surprise.Napoleon noticed at once what they were about and guessed that they werenot ready. He did not wish to deprive them of the pleasure of giving hima surprise, so he pretended not to see de Beausset and called Fabvier tohim, listening silently and with a stern frown to what Fabvier told himof the heroism and devotion of his troops fighting at Salamanca, at theother end of Europe, with but one thought--to be worthy of theirEmperor--and but one fear--to fail to please him. The result of thatbattle had been deplorable. Napoleon made ironic remarks duringFabvier's account, as if he had not expected that matters could gootherwise in his absence."I must make up for that in Moscow," said Napoleon. "I'll see youlater," he added, and summoned de Beausset, who by that time hadprepared the surprise, having placed something on the chairs and coveredit with a cloth.De Beausset bowed low, with that courtly French bow which only the oldretainers of the Bourbons knew how to make, and approached him,presenting an envelope.Napoleon turned to him gaily and pulled his ear."You have hurried here. I am very glad. Well, what is Paris saying?" heasked, suddenly changing his former stern expression for a most cordialtone."Sire, all Paris regrets your absence," replied de Beausset as wasproper.But though Napoleon knew that de Beausset had to say something of thiskind, and though in his lucid moments he knew it was untrue, he waspleased to hear it from him. Again he honored him by touching his ear."I am very sorry to have made you travel so far," said he."Sire, I expected nothing less than to find you at the gates of Moscow,"replied de Beausset.Napoleon smiled and, lifting his head absent-mindedly, glanced to theright. An aide-de-camp approached with gliding steps and offered him agold snuffbox, which he took."Yes, it has happened luckily for you," he said, raising the opensnuffbox to his nose. "You are fond of travel, and in three days youwill see Moscow. You surely did not expect to see that Asiatic capital.You will have a pleasant journey."De Beausset bowed gratefully at this regard for his taste for travel (ofwhich he had not till then been aware)."Ha, what's this?" asked Napoleon, noticing that all the courtiers werelooking at something concealed under a cloth.With courtly adroitness de Beausset half turned and without turning hisback to the Emperor retired two steps, twitching off the cloth at thesame time, and said:"A present to Your Majesty from the Empress."It was a portrait, painted in bright colors by Gerard, of the son borneto Napoleon by the daughter of the Emperor of Austria, the boy whom forsome reason everyone called "The King of Rome."A very pretty curly-headed boy with a look of the Christ in the SistineMadonna was depicted playing at stick and ball. The ball represented theterrestrial globe and the stick in his other hand a scepter.Though it was not clear what the artist meant to express by depictingthe so-called King of Rome spiking the earth with a stick, the allegoryapparently seemed to Napoleon, as it had done to all who had seen it inParis, quite clear and very pleasing."The King of Rome!" he said, pointing to the portrait with a gracefulgesture. "Admirable!"With the natural capacity of an Italian for changing the expression ofhis face at will, he drew nearer to the portrait and assumed a look ofpensive tenderness. He felt that what he now said and did would behistorical, and it seemed to him that it would now be best for him--whose grandeur enabled his son to play stick and ball with theterrestrial globe--to show, in contrast to that grandeur, the simplestpaternal tenderness. His eyes grew dim, he moved forward, glanced roundat a chair (which seemed to place itself under him), and sat down on itbefore the portrait. At a single gesture from him everyone went out ontiptoe, leaving the great man to himself and his emotion.Having sat still for a while he touched--himself not knowing why--thethick spot of paint representing the highest light in the portrait,rose, and recalled de Beausset and the officer on duty. He ordered theportrait to be carried outside his tent, that the Old Guard, stationedround it, might not be deprived of the pleasure of seeing the King ofRome, the son and heir of their adored monarch.And while he was doing M. de Beausset the honor of breakfasting withhim, they heard, as Napoleon had anticipated, the rapturous cries of theofficers and men of the Old Guard who had run up to see the portrait."Vive l'Empereur! Vive le roi de Rome! Vive l'Empereur!" came thoseecstatic cries.After breakfast Napoleon in de Beausset's presence dictated his order ofthe day to the army."Short and energetic!" he remarked when he had read over theproclamation which he had dictated straight off without corrections. Itran:Soldiers! This is the battle you have so longed for. Victory depends onyou. It is essential for us; it will give us all we need: comfortablequarters and a speedy return to our country. Behave as you did atAusterlitz, Friedland, Vitebsk, and Smolensk. Let our remotest posterityrecall your achievements this day with pride. Let it be said of each ofyou: "He was in the great battle before Moscow!""Before Moscow!" repeated Napoleon, and inviting M. de Beausset, who wasso fond of travel, to accompany him on his ride, he went out of the tentto where the horses stood saddled."Your Majesty is too kind!" replied de Beausset to the invitation toaccompany the Emperor; he wanted to sleep, did not know how to ride andwas afraid of doing so.But Napoleon nodded to the traveler, and de Beausset had to mount. WhenNapoleon came out of the tent the shouting of the Guards before hisson's portrait grew still louder. Napoleon frowned."Take him away!" he said, pointing with a gracefully majestic gesture tothe portrait. "It is too soon for him to see a field of battle."De Beausset closed his eyes, bowed his head, and sighed deeply, toindicate how profoundly he valued and comprehended the Emperor's words.CHAPTER XXVIIOn the twenty-fifth of August, so his historians tell us, Napoleon spentthe whole day on horseback inspecting the locality, considering planssubmitted to him by his marshals, and personally giving commands to hisgenerals.The original line of the Russian forces along the river Kolocha had beendislocated by the capture of the Shevardino Redoubt on the twenty-fourth, and part of the line--the left flank--had been drawn back. Thatpart of the line was not entrenched and in front of it the ground wasmore open and level than elsewhere. It was evident to anyone, militaryor not, that it was here the French should attack. It would seem thatnot much consideration was needed to reach this conclusion, nor anyparticular care or trouble on the part of the Emperor and his marshals,nor was there any need of that special and supreme quality called geniusthat people are so apt to ascribe to Napoleon; yet the historians whodescribed the event later and the men who then surrounded Napoleon, andhe himself, thought otherwise.Napoleon rode over the plain and surveyed the locality with a profoundair and in silence, nodded with approval or shook his head dubiously,and without communicating to the generals around him the profound courseof ideas which guided his decisions merely gave them his finalconclusions in the form of commands. Having listened to a suggestionfrom Davout, who was now called Prince d'Eckmuhl, to turn the Russianleft wing, Napoleon said it should not be done, without explaining whynot. To a proposal made by General Campan (who was to attack thefleches) to lead his division through the woods, Napoleon agreed, thoughthe so-called Duke of Elchingen (Ney) ventured to remark that a movementthrough the woods was dangerous and might disorder the division.Having inspected the country opposite the Shevardino Redoubt, Napoleonpondered a little in silence and then indicated the spots where twobatteries should be set up by the morrow to act against the Russianentrenchments, and the places where, in line with them, the fieldartillery should be placed.After giving these and other commands he returned to his tent, and thedispositions for the battle were written down from his dictation.These dispositions, of which the French historians write with enthusiasmand other historians with profound respect, were as follows:At dawn the two new batteries established during the night on the plainoccupied by the Prince d'Eckmuhl will open fire on the opposingbatteries of the enemy.At the same time the commander of the artillery of the 1st Corps,General Pernetti, with thirty cannon of Campan's division and all thehowitzers of Dessaix's and Friant's divisions, will move forward, openfire, and overwhelm with shellfire the enemy's battery, against whichwill operate:24 guns of the artillery of the Guards 30 guns of Campan's divisionand     8 guns of Friant's and Dessaix's divisions --in all 62 guns.The commander of the artillery of the 3rd Corps, General Fouche, willplace the howitzers of the 3rd and 8th Corps, sixteen in all, on theflanks of the battery that is to bombard the entrenchment on the left,which will have forty guns in all directed against it.General Sorbier must be ready at the first order to advance with all thehowitzers of the Guard's artillery against either one or other of theentrenchments.During the cannonade Prince Poniatowski is to advance through the woodon the village and turn the enemy's position.General Campan will move through the wood to seize the firstfortification.After the advance has begun in this manner, orders will be given inaccordance with the enemy's movements.The cannonade on the left flank will begin as soon as the guns of theright wing are heard. The sharpshooters of Morand's division and of thevice-King's division will open a heavy fire on seeing the attackcommence on the right wing.The vice-King will occupy the village and cross by its three bridges,advancing to the same heights as Morand's and Gibrard's divisions, whichunder his leadership will be directed against the redoubt and come intoline with the rest of the forces.All this must be done in good order (le tout se fera avec ordre etmethode) as far as possible retaining troops in reserve.The Imperial Camp near Mozhaysk,September, 6, 1812.These dispositions, which are very obscure and confused if one allowsoneself to regard the arrangements without religious awe of his genius,related to Napoleon's orders to deal with four points--four differentorders. Not one of these was, or could be, carried out.In the disposition it is said first that the batteries placed on thespot chosen by Napoleon, with the guns of Pernetti and Fouche; whichwere to come in line with them, 102 guns in all, were to open fire andshower shells on the Russian fleches and redoubts. This could not bedone, as from the spots selected by Napoleon the projectiles did notcarry to the Russian works, and those 102 guns shot into the air untilthe nearest commander, contrary to Napoleon's instructions, moved themforward.The second order was that Poniatowski, moving to the village through thewood, should turn the Russian left flank. This could not be done and wasnot done, because Poniatowski, advancing on the village through thewood, met Tuchkov there barring his way, and could not and did not turnthe Russian position.The third order was: General Campan will move through the wood to seizethe first fortification. General Campan's division did not seize thefirst fortification but was driven back, for on emerging from the woodit had to reform under grapeshot, of which Napoleon was unaware.The fourth order was: The vice-King will occupy the village (Borodino)and cross by its three bridges, advancing to the same heights asMorand's and Gdrard's divisions (for whose movements no directions aregiven), which under his leadership will be directed against the redoubtand come into line with the rest of the forces.As far as one can make out, not so much from this unintelligiblesentence as from the attempts the vice-King made to execute the ordersgiven him, he was to advance from the left through Borodino to theredoubt while the divisions of Morand and Gerard were to advancesimultaneously from the front.All this, like the other parts of the disposition, was not and could notbe executed. After passing through Borodino the vice-King was drivenback to the Kolocha and could get no farther; while the divisions ofMorand and Gerard did not take the redoubt but were driven back, and theredoubt was only taken at the end of the battle by the cavalry (a thingprobably unforeseen and not heard of by Napoleon). So not one of theorders in the disposition was, or could be, executed. But in thedisposition it is said that, after the fight has commenced in thismanner, orders will be given in accordance with the enemy's movements,and so it might be supposed that all necessary arrangements would bemade by Napoleon during the battle. But this was not and could not bedone, for during the whole battle Napoleon was so far away that, asappeared later, he could not know the course of the battle and not oneof his orders during the fight could be executed.CHAPTER XXVIIIMany historians say that the French did not win the battle of Borodinobecause Napoleon had a cold, and that if he had not had a cold theorders he gave before and during the battle would have been still morefull of genius and Russia would have been lost and the face of the worldhave been changed. To historians who believe that Russia was shaped bythe will of one man--Peter the Great--and that France from a republicbecame an empire and French armies went to Russia at the will of oneman--Napoleon--to say that Russia remained a power because Napoleon hada bad cold on the twenty-fourth of August may seem logical andconvincing.If it had depended on Napoleon's will to fight or not to fight thebattle of Borodino, and if this or that other arrangement depended onhis will, then evidently a cold affecting the manifestation of his willmight have saved Russia, and consequently the valet who omitted to bringNapoleon his waterproof boots on the twenty-fourth would have been thesavior of Russia. Along that line of thought such a deduction isindubitable, as indubitable as the deduction Voltaire made in jest(without knowing what he was jesting at) when he saw that the Massacreof St. Bartholomew was due to Charles IX's stomach being deranged. Butto men who do not admit that Russia was formed by the will of one man,Peter I, or that the French Empire was formed and the war with Russiabegun by the will of one man, Napoleon, that argument seems not merelyuntrue and irrational, but contrary to all human reality. To thequestion of what causes historic events another answer presents itself,namely, that the course of human events is predetermined from on high--depends on the coincidence of the wills of all who take part in theevents, and that a Napoleon's influence on the course of these events ispurely external and fictitious.Strange as at first glance it may seem to suppose that the Massacre ofSt. Bartholomew was not due to Charles IX's will, though he gave theorder for it and thought it was done as a result of that order; andstrange as it may seem to suppose that the slaughter of eighty thousandmen at Borodino was not due to Napoleon's will, though he ordered thecommencement and conduct of the battle and thought it was done becausehe ordered it; strange as these suppositions appear, yet human dignity--which tells me that each of us is, if not more at least not less a manthan the great Napoleon--demands the acceptance of that solution of thequestion, and historic investigation abundantly confirms it.At the battle of Borodino Napoleon shot at no one and killed no one.That was all done by the soldiers. Therefore it was not he who killedpeople.The French soldiers went to kill and be killed at the battle of Borodinonot because of Napoleon's orders but by their own volition. The wholearmy--French, Italian, German, Polish, and Dutch--hungry, ragged, andweary of the campaign, felt at the sight of an army blocking their roadto Moscow that the wine was drawn and must be drunk. Had Napoleon thenforbidden them to fight the Russians, they would have killed him andhave proceeded to fight the Russians because it was inevitable.When they heard Napoleon's proclamation offering them, as compensationfor mutilation and death, the words of posterity about their having beenin the battle before Moscow, they cried "Vive l'Empereur!" just as theyhad cried "Vive l'Empereur!" at the sight of the portrait of the boypiercing the terrestrial globe with a toy stick, and just as they wouldhave cried "Vive l'Empereur!" at any nonsense that might be told them.There was nothing left for them to do but cry "Vive l'Empereur!" and goto fight, in order to get food and rest as conquerors in Moscow. So itwas not because of Napoleon's commands that they killed their fellowmen.And it was not Napoleon who directed the course of the battle, for noneof his orders were executed and during the battle he did not know whatwas going on before him. So the way in which these people killed oneanother was not decided by Napoleon's will but occurred independently ofhim, in accord with the will of hundreds of thousands of people who tookpart in the common action. It only seemed to Napoleon that it all tookplace by his will. And so the question whether he had or had not a coldhas no more historic interest than the cold of the least of thetransport soldiers.Moreover, the assertion made by various writers that his cold was thecause of his dispositions not being as well-planned as on formeroccasions, and of his orders during the battle not being as good aspreviously, is quite baseless, which again shows that Napoleon's cold onthe twenty-sixth of August was unimportant.The dispositions cited above are not at all worse, but are even better,than previous dispositions by which he had won victories. His pseudo-orders during the battle were also no worse than formerly, but much thesame as usual. These dispositions and orders only seem worse thanprevious ones because the battle of Borodino was the first Napoleon didnot win. The profoundest and most excellent dispositions and orders seemvery bad, and every learned militarist criticizes them with looks ofimportance, when they relate to a battle that has been lost, and thevery worst dispositions and orders seem very good, and serious peoplefill whole volumes to demonstrate their merits, when they relate to abattle that has been won.The dispositions drawn up by Weyrother for the battle of Austerlitz werea model of perfection for that kind of composition, but still they werecriticized--criticized for their very perfection, for their excessiveminuteness.Napoleon at the battle of Borodino fulfilled his office asrepresentative of authority as well as, and even better than, at otherbattles. He did nothing harmful to the progress of the battle; heinclined to the most reasonable opinions, he made no confusion, did notcontradict himself, did not get frightened or run away from the field ofbattle, but with his great tact and military experience carried out hisrole of appearing to command, calmly and with dignity.CHAPTER XXIXOn returning from a second inspection of the lines, Napoleon remarked:"The chessmen are set up, the game will begin tomorrow!"Having ordered punch and summoned de Beausset, he began to talk to himabout Paris and about some changes he meant to make in the Empress'household, surprising the prefect by his memory of minute detailsrelating to the court.He showed an interest in trifles, joked about de Beausset's love oftravel, and chatted carelessly, as a famous, self-confident surgeon whoknows his job does when turning up his sleeves and putting on his apronwhile a patient is being strapped to the operating table. "The matter isin my hands and is clear and definite in my head. When the time comes toset to work I shall do it as no one else could, but now I can jest, andthe more I jest and the calmer I am the more tranquil and confident youought to be, and the more amazed at my genius."Having finished his second glass of punch, Napoleon went to rest beforethe serious business which, he considered, awaited him next day. He wasso much interested in that task that he was unable to sleep, and inspite of his cold which had grown worse from the dampness of theevening, he went into the large division of the tent at three o'clock inthe morning, loudly blowing his nose. He asked whether the Russians hadnot withdrawn, and was told that the enemy's fires were still in thesame places. He nodded approval.The adjutant in attendance came into the tent."Well, Rapp, do you think we shall do good business today?" Napoleonasked him."Without doubt, sire," replied Rapp.Napoleon looked at him."Do you remember, sire, what you did me the honor to say at Smolensk?"continued Rapp. "The wine is drawn and must be drunk."Napoleon frowned and sat silent for a long time leaning his head on hishand."This poor army!" he suddenly remarked. "It has diminished greatly sinceSmolensk. Fortune is frankly a courtesan, Rapp. I have always said soand I am beginning to experience it. But the Guards, Rapp, the Guardsare intact?" he remarked interrogatively."Yes, sire," replied Rapp.Napoleon took a lozenge, put it in his mouth, and glanced at his watch.He was not sleepy and it was still not nearly morning. It was impossibleto give further orders for the sake of killing time, for the orders hadall been given and were now being executed."Have the biscuits and rice been served out to the regiments of theGuards?" asked Napoleon sternly."Yes, sire.""The rice too?"Rapp replied that he had given the Emperor's order about the rice, butNapoleon shook his head in dissatisfaction as if not believing that hisorder had been executed. An attendant came in with punch. Napoleonordered another glass to be brought for Rapp, and silently sipped hisown."I have neither taste nor smell," he remarked, sniffing at his glass."This cold is tiresome. They talk about medicine--what is the good ofmedicine when it can't cure a cold! Corvisart gave me these lozenges butthey don't help at all. What can doctors cure? One can't cure anything.Our body is a machine for living. It is organized for that, it is itsnature. Let life go on in it unhindered and let it defend itself, itwill do more than if you paralyze it by encumbering it with remedies.Our body is like a perfect watch that should go for a certain time; thewatchmaker cannot open it, he can only adjust it by fumbling, and thatblindfold.... Yes, our body is just a machine for living, that is all."And having entered on the path of definition, of which he was fond,Napoleon suddenly and unexpectedly gave a new one."Do you know, Rapp, what military art is?" asked he. "It is the art ofbeing stronger than the enemy at a given moment. That's all."Rapp made no reply."Tomorrow we shall have to deal with Kutuzov!" said Napoleon. "We shallsee! Do you remember at Braunau he commanded an army for three weeks anddid not once mount a horse to inspect his entrenchments.... We shallsee!"He looked at his watch. It was still only four o'clock. He did not feelsleepy. The punch was finished and there was still nothing to do. Herose, walked to and fro, put on a warm overcoat and a hat, and went outof the tent. The night was dark and damp, a scarcely perceptiblemoisture was descending from above. Near by, the campfires were dimlyburning among the French Guards, and in the distance those of theRussian line shone through the smoke. The weather was calm, and therustle and tramp of the French troops already beginning to move to takeup their positions were clearly audible.Napoleon walked about in front of his tent, looked at the fires andlistened to these sounds, and as he was passing a tall guardsman in ashaggy cap, who was standing sentinel before his tent and had drawnhimself up like a black pillar at sight of the Emperor, Napoleon stoppedin front of him."What year did you enter the service?" he asked with that affectation ofmilitary bluntness and geniality with which he always addressed thesoldiers.The man answered the question."Ah! One of the old ones! Has your regiment had its rice?""It has, Your Majesty."Napoleon nodded and walked away.At half-past five Napoleon rode to the village of Shevardino.It was growing light, the sky was clearing, only a single cloud lay inthe east. The abandoned campfires were burning themselves out in thefaint morning light.On the right a single deep report of a cannon resounded and died away inthe prevailing silence. Some minutes passed. A second and a third reportshook the air, then a fourth and a fifth boomed solemnly near by on theright.The first shots had not yet ceased to reverberate before others rang outand yet more were heard mingling with and overtaking one another.Napoleon with his suite rode up to the Shevardino Redoubt where hedismounted. The game had begun.CHAPTER XXXOn returning to Gorki after having seen Prince Andrew, Pierre orderedhis groom to get the horses ready and to call him early in the morning,and then immediately fell asleep behind a partition in a corner Borishad given up to him.Before he was thoroughly awake next morning everybody had already leftthe hut. The panes were rattling in the little windows and his groom wasshaking him."Your excellency! Your excellency! Your excellency!" he kept repeatingpertinaciously while he shook Pierre by the shoulder without looking athim, having apparently lost hope of getting him to wake up."What? Has it begun? Is it time?" Pierre asked, waking up."Hear the firing," said the groom, a discharged soldier. "All thegentlemen have gone out, and his Serene Highness himself rode past longago."Pierre dressed hastily and ran out to the porch. Outside all was bright,fresh, dewy, and cheerful. The sun, just bursting forth from behind acloud that had concealed it, was shining, with rays still half broken bythe clouds, over the roofs of the street opposite, on the dew-besprinkled dust of the road, on the walls of the houses, on thewindows, the fence, and on Pierre's horses standing before the hut. Theroar of guns sounded more distinct outside. An adjutant accompanied by aCossack passed by at a sharp trot."It's time, Count; it's time!" cried the adjutant.Telling the groom to follow him with the horses, Pierre went down thestreet to the knoll from which he had looked at the field of battle theday before. A crowd of military men was assembled there, members of thestaff could be heard conversing in French, and Kutuzov's gray head in awhite cap with a red band was visible, his gray nape sunk between hisshoulders. He was looking through a field glass down the highroad beforehim.Mounting the steps to the knoll Pierre looked at the scene before him,spellbound by beauty. It was the same panorama he had admired from thatspot the day before, but now the whole place was full of troops andcovered by smoke clouds from the guns, and the slanting rays of thebright sun, rising slightly to the left behind Pierre, cast upon itthrough the clear morning air penetrating streaks of rosy, golden-tintedlight and long dark shadows. The forest at the farthest extremity of thepanorama seemed carved in some precious stone of a yellowish-greencolor; its undulating outline was silhouetted against the horizon andwas pierced beyond Valuevo by the Smolensk highroad crowded with troops.Nearer at hand glittered golden cornfields interspersed with copses.There were troops to be seen everywhere, in front and to the right andleft. All this was vivid, majestic, and unexpected; but what impressedPierre most of all was the view of the battlefield itself, of Borodinoand the hollows on both sides of the Kolocha.Above the Kolocha, in Borodino and on both sides of it, especially tothe left where the Voyna flowing between its marshy banks falls into theKolocha, a mist had spread which seemed to melt, to dissolve, and tobecome translucent when the brilliant sun appeared and magically coloredand outlined everything. The smoke of the guns mingled with this mist,and over the whole expanse and through that mist the rays of the morningsun were reflected, flashing back like lightning from the water, fromthe dew, and from the bayonets of the troops crowded together by theriverbanks and in Borodino. A white church could be seen through themist, and here and there the roofs of huts in Borodino as well as densemasses of soldiers, or green ammunition chests and ordnance. And allthis moved, or seemed to move, as the smoke and mist spread out over thewhole space. Just as in the mist-enveloped hollow near Borodino, soalong the entire line outside and above it and especially in the woodsand fields to the left, in the valleys and on the summits of the highground, clouds of powder smoke seemed continually to spring up out ofnothing, now singly, now several at a time, some translucent, othersdense, which, swelling, growing, rolling, and blending, extended overthe whole expanse.These puffs of smoke and (strange to say) the sound of the firingproduced the chief beauty of the spectacle."Puff!"--suddenly a round compact cloud of smoke was seen merging fromviolet into gray and milky white, and "boom!" came the report a secondlater."Puff! puff!"--and two clouds arose pushing one another and blendingtogether; and "boom, boom!" came the sounds confirming what the eye hadseen.Pierre glanced round at the first cloud, which he had seen as a roundcompact ball, and in its place already were balloons of smoke floatingto one side, and--"puff" (with a pause)--"puff, puff!" three and thenfour more appeared and then from each, with the same interval--"boom--boom, boom!" came the fine, firm, precise sounds in reply. It seemed asif those smoke clouds sometimes ran and sometimes stood still whilewoods, fields, and glittering bayonets ran past them. From the left,over fields and bushes, those large balls of smoke were continuallyappearing followed by their solemn reports, while nearer still, in thehollows and woods, there burst from the muskets small cloudlets that hadno time to become balls, but had their little echoes in just the sameway. "Trakh-ta-ta-takh!" came the frequent crackle of musketry, but itwas irregular and feeble in comparison with the reports of the cannon.Pierre wished to be there with that smoke, those shining bayonets, thatmovement, and those sounds. He turned to look at Kutuzov and his suite,to compare his impressions with those of others. They were all lookingat the field of battle as he was, and, as it seemed to him, with thesame feelings. All their faces were now shining with that latent warmthof feeling Pierre had noticed the day before and had fully understoodafter his talk with Prince Andrew."Go, my dear fellow, go... and Christ be with you!" Kutuzov was sayingto a general who stood beside him, not taking his eye from thebattlefield.Having received this order the general passed by Pierre on his way downthe knoll."To the crossing!" said the general coldly and sternly in reply to oneof the staff who asked where he was going."I'll go there too, I too!" thought Pierre, and followed the general.The general mounted a horse a Cossack had brought him. Pierre went tohis groom who was holding his horses and, asking which was the quietest,clambered onto it, seized it by the mane, and turning out his toespressed his heels against its sides and, feeling that his spectacleswere slipping off but unable to let go of the mane and reins, hegalloped after the general, causing the staff officers to smile as theywatched him from the knoll.CHAPTER XXXIHaving descended the hill the general after whom Pierre was gallopingturned sharply to the left, and Pierre, losing sight of him, galloped inamong some ranks of infantry marching ahead of him. He tried to passeither in front of them or to the right or left, but there were soldierseverywhere, all with the same preoccupied expression and busy with someunseen but evidently important task. They all gazed with the samedissatisfied and inquiring expression at this stout man in a white hat,who for some unknown reason threatened to trample them under his horse'shoofs."Why ride into the middle of the battalion?" one of them shouted at him.Another prodded his horse with the butt end of a musket, and Pierre,bending over his saddlebow and hardly able to control his shying horse,galloped ahead of the soldiers where there was a free space.There was a bridge ahead of him, where other soldiers stood firing.Pierre rode up to them. Without being aware of it he had come to thebridge across the Kolocha between Gorki and Borodino, which the French(having occupied Borodino) were attacking in the first phase of thebattle. Pierre saw that there was a bridge in front of him and thatsoldiers were doing something on both sides of it and in the meadow,among the rows of new-mown hay which he had taken no notice of amid thesmoke of the campfires the day before; but despite the incessant firinggoing on there he had no idea that this was the field of battle. He didnot notice the sound of the bullets whistling from every side, or theprojectiles that flew over him, did not see the enemy on the other sideof the river, and for a long time did not notice the killed and wounded,though many fell near him. He looked about him with a smile which didnot leave his face."Why's that fellow in front of the line?" shouted somebody at him again."To the left!... Keep to the right!" the men shouted to him.Pierre went to the right, and unexpectedly encountered one of Raevski'sadjutants whom he knew. The adjutant looked angrily at him, evidentlyalso intending to shout at him, but on recognizing him he nodded."How have you got here?" he said, and galloped on.Pierre, feeling out of place there, having nothing to do, and afraid ofgetting in someone's way again, galloped after the adjutant."What's happening here? May I come with you?" he asked."One moment, one moment!" replied the adjutant, and riding up to a stoutcolonel who was standing in the meadow, he gave him some message andthen addressed Pierre."Why have you come here, Count?" he asked with a smile. "Stillinquisitive?""Yes, yes," assented Pierre.But the adjutant turned his horse about and rode on."Here it's tolerable," said he, "but with Bagration on the left flankthey're getting it frightfully hot.""Really?" said Pierre. "Where is that?""Come along with me to our knoll. We can get a view from there and inour battery it is still bearable," said the adjutant. "Will you come?""Yes, I'll come with you," replied Pierre, looking round for his groom.It was only now that he noticed wounded men staggering along or beingcarried on stretchers. On that very meadow he had ridden over the daybefore, a soldier was lying athwart the rows of scented hay, with hishead thrown awkwardly back and his shako off."Why haven't they carried him away?" Pierre was about to ask, but seeingthe stern expression of the adjutant who was also looking that way, hechecked himself.Pierre did not find his groom and rode along the hollow with theadjutant to Raevski's Redoubt. His horse lagged behind the adjutant'sand jolted him at every step."You don't seem to be used to riding, Count?" remarked the adjutant."No it's not that, but her action seems so jerky," said Pierre in apuzzled tone."Why... she's wounded!" said the adjutant. "In the off foreleg above theknee. A bullet, no doubt. I congratulate you, Count, on your baptism offire!"Having ridden in the smoke past the Sixth Corps, behind the artillerywhich had been moved forward and was in action, deafening them with thenoise of firing, they came to a small wood. There it was cool and quiet,with a scent of autumn. Pierre and the adjutant dismounted and walked upthe hill on foot."Is the general here?" asked the adjutant on reaching the knoll."He was here a minute ago but has just gone that way," someone told him,pointing to the right.The adjutant looked at Pierre as if puzzled what to do with him now."Don't trouble about me," said Pierre. "I'll go up onto the knoll if Imay?""Yes, do. You'll see everything from there and it's less dangerous, andI'll come for you."Pierre went to the battery and the adjutant rode on. They did not meetagain, and only much later did Pierre learn that he lost an arm thatday.The knoll to which Pierre ascended was that famous one afterwards knownto the Russians as the Knoll Battery or Raevski's Redoubt, and to theFrench as la grande redoute, la fatale redoute, la redoute du centre,around which tens of thousands fell, and which the French regarded asthe key to the whole position.This redoubt consisted of a knoll, on three sides of which trenches hadbeen dug. Within the entrenchment stood ten guns that were being firedthrough openings in the earthwork.In line with the knoll on both sides stood other guns which also firedincessantly. A little behind the guns stood infantry. When ascendingthat knoll Pierre had no notion that this spot, on which small trencheshad been dug and from which a few guns were firing, was the mostimportant point of the battle.On the contrary, just because he happened to be there he thought it oneof the least significant parts of the field.Having reached the knoll, Pierre sat down at one end of a trenchsurrounding the battery and gazed at what was going on around him withan unconsciously happy smile. Occasionally he rose and walked about thebattery still with that same smile, trying not to obstruct the soldierswho were loading, hauling the guns, and continually running past himwith bags and charges. The guns of that battery were being firedcontinually one after another with a deafening roar, enveloping thewhole neighborhood in powder smoke.In contrast with the dread felt by the infantrymen placed in support,here in the battery where a small number of men busy at their work wereseparated from the rest by a trench, everyone experienced a common andas it were family feeling of animation.The intrusion of Pierre's nonmilitary figure in a white hat made anunpleasant impression at first. The soldiers looked askance at him withsurprise and even alarm as they went past him. The senior artilleryofficer, a tall, long-legged, pockmarked man, moved over to Pierre as ifto see the action of the farthest gun and looked at him with curiosity.A young round-faced officer, quite a boy still and evidently only justout of the Cadet College, who was zealously commanding the two gunsentrusted to him, addressed Pierre sternly."Sir," he said, "permit me to ask you to stand aside. You must not behere."The soldiers shook their heads disapprovingly as they looked at Pierre.But when they had convinced themselves that this man in the white hatwas doing no harm, but either sat quietly on the slope of the trenchwith a shy smile or, politely making way for the soldiers, paced up anddown the battery under fire as calmly as if he were on a boulevard,their feeling of hostile distrust gradually began to change into akindly and bantering sympathy, such as soldiers feel for their dogs,cocks, goats, and in general for the animals that live with theregiment. The men soon accepted Pierre into their family, adopted him,gave him a nickname ("our gentleman"), and made kindly fun of him amongthemselves.A shell tore up the earth two paces from Pierre and he looked aroundwith a smile as he brushed from his clothes some earth it had thrown up."And how's it you're not afraid, sir, really now?" a red-faced, broad-shouldered soldier asked Pierre, with a grin that disclosed a set ofsound, white teeth."Are you afraid, then?" said Pierre."What else do you expect?" answered the soldier. "She has no mercy, youknow! When she comes spluttering down, out go your innards. One can'thelp being afraid," he said laughing.Several of the men, with bright kindly faces, stopped beside Pierre.They seemed not to have expected him to talk like anybody else, and thediscovery that he did so delighted them."It's the business of us soldiers. But in a gentleman it's wonderful!There's a gentleman for you!""To your places!" cried the young officer to the men gathered roundPierre.The young officer was evidently exercising his duties for the first orsecond time and therefore treated both his superiors and the men withgreat precision and formality.The booming cannonade and the fusillade of musketry were growing moreintense over the whole field, especially to the left where Bagration'sfleches were, but where Pierre was the smoke of the firing made italmost impossible to distinguish anything. Moreover, his whole attentionwas engrossed by watching the family circle--separated from all else--formed by the men in the battery. His first unconscious feeling ofjoyful animation produced by the sights and sounds of the battlefieldwas now replaced by another, especially since he had seen that soldierlying alone in the hayfield. Now, seated on the slope of the trench, heobserved the faces of those around him.By ten o'clock some twenty men had already been carried away from thebattery; two guns were smashed and cannon balls fell more and morefrequently on the battery and spent bullets buzzed and whistled around.But the men in the battery seemed not to notice this, and merry voicesand jokes were heard on all sides."A live one!" shouted a man as a whistling shell approached."Not this way! To the infantry!" added another with loud laughter,seeing the shell fly past and fall into the ranks of the supports."Are you bowing to a friend, eh?" remarked another, chaffing a peasantwho ducked low as a cannon ball flew over.Several soldiers gathered by the wall of the trench, looking out to seewhat was happening in front."They've withdrawn the front line, it has retired," said they, pointingover the earthwork."Mind your own business," an old sergeant shouted at them. "If they'veretired it's because there's work for them to do farther back."And the sergeant, taking one of the men by the shoulders, gave him ashove with his knee. This was followed by a burst of laughter."To the fifth gun, wheel it up!" came shouts from one side."Now then, all together, like bargees!" rose the merry voices of thosewho were moving the gun."Oh, she nearly knocked our gentleman's hat off!" cried the red-facedhumorist, showing his teeth chaffing Pierre. "Awkward baggage!" he addedreproachfully to a cannon ball that struck a cannon wheel and a man'sleg."Now then, you foxes!" said another, laughing at some militiamen who,stooping low, entered the battery to carry away the wounded man."So this gruel isn't to your taste? Oh, you crows! You're scared!" theyshouted at the militiamen who stood hesitating before the man whose leghad been torn off."There, lads... oh, oh!" they mimicked the peasants, "they don't like itat all!"Pierre noticed that after every ball that hit the redoubt, and afterevery loss, the liveliness increased more and more.As the flames of the fire hidden within come more and more vividly andrapidly from an approaching thundercloud, so, as if in opposition towhat was taking place, the lightning of hidden fire growing more andmore intense glowed in the faces of these men.Pierre did not look out at the battlefield and was not concerned to knowwhat was happening there; he was entirely absorbed in watching this firewhich burned ever more brightly and which he felt was flaming up in thesame way in his own soul.At ten o'clock the infantry that had been among the bushes in front ofthe battery and along the Kamenka streamlet retreated. From the batterythey could be seen running back past it carrying their wounded on theirmuskets. A general with his suite came to the battery, and afterspeaking to the colonel gave Pierre an angry look and went away againhaving ordered the infantry supports behind the battery to lie down, soas to be less exposed to fire. After this from amid the ranks ofinfantry to the right of the battery came the sound of a drum and shoutsof command, and from the battery one saw how those ranks of infantrymoved forward.Pierre looked over the wall of the trench and was particularly struck bya pale young officer who, letting his sword hang down, was walkingbackwards and kept glancing uneasily around.The ranks of the infantry disappeared amid the smoke but their long-drawn shout and rapid musketry firing could still be heard. A fewminutes later crowds of wounded men and stretcher-bearers came back fromthat direction. Projectiles began to fall still more frequently in thebattery. Several men were lying about who had not been removed. Aroundthe cannon the men moved still more briskly and busily. No one anylonger took notice of Pierre. Once or twice he was shouted at for beingin the way. The senior officer moved with big, rapid strides from onegun to another with a frowning face. The young officer, with his facestill more flushed, commanded the men more scrupulously than ever. Thesoldiers handed up the charges, turned, loaded, and did their businesswith strained smartness. They gave little jumps as they walked, asthough they were on springs.The stormcloud had come upon them, and in every face the fire whichPierre had watched kindle burned up brightly. Pierre standing beside thecommanding officer. The young officer, his hand to his shako, ran up tohis superior."I have the honor to report, sir, that only eight rounds are left. Arewe to continue firing?" he asked."Grapeshot!" the senior shouted, without answering the question, lookingover the wall of the trench.Suddenly something happened: the young officer gave a gasp and bendingdouble sat down on the ground like a bird shot on the wing. Everythingbecame strange, confused, and misty in Pierre's eyes.One cannon ball after another whistled by and struck the earthwork, asoldier, or a gun. Pierre, who had not noticed these sounds before, nowheard nothing else. On the right of the battery soldiers shouting"Hurrah!" were running not forwards but backwards, it seemed to Pierre.A cannon ball struck the very end of the earth work by which he wasstanding, crumbling down the earth; a black ball flashed before his eyesand at the same instant plumped into something. Some militiamen who wereentering the battery ran back."All with grapeshot!" shouted the officer.The sergeant ran up to the officer and in a frightened whisper informedhim (as a butler at dinner informs his master that there is no more ofsome wine asked for) that there were no more charges."The scoundrels! What are they doing?" shouted the officer, turning toPierre.The officer's face was red and perspiring and his eyes glittered underhis frowning brow."Run to the reserves and bring up the ammunition boxes!" he yelled,angrily avoiding Pierre with his eyes and speaking to his men."I'll go," said Pierre.The officer, without answering him, strode across to the opposite side."Don't fire.... Wait!" he shouted.The man who had been ordered to go for ammunition stumbled againstPierre."Eh, sir, this is no place for you," said he, and ran down the slope.Pierre ran after him, avoiding the spot where the young officer wassitting.One cannon ball, another, and a third flew over him, falling in front,beside, and behind him. Pierre ran down the slope. "Where am I going?"he suddenly asked himself when he was already near the green ammunitionwagons. He halted irresolutely, not knowing whether to return or go on.Suddenly a terrible concussion threw him backwards to the ground. At thesame instant he was dazzled by a great flash of flame, and immediately adeafening roar, crackling, and whistling made his ears tingle.When he came to himself he was sitting on the ground leaning on hishands; the ammunition wagons he had been approaching no longer existed,only charred green boards and rags littered the scorched grass, and ahorse, dangling fragments of its shaft behind it, galloped past, whileanother horse lay, like Pierre, on the ground, uttering prolonged andpiercing cries.CHAPTER XXXIIBeside himself with terror Pierre jumped up and ran back to the battery,as to the only refuge from the horrors that surrounded him.On entering the earthwork he noticed that there were men doing somethingthere but that no shots were being fired from the battery. He had notime to realize who these men were. He saw the senior officer lying onthe earth wall with his back turned as if he were examining somethingdown below and that one of the soldiers he had noticed before wasstruggling forward shouting "Brothers!" and trying to free himself fromsome men who were holding him by the arm. He also saw something elsethat was strange.But he had not time to realize that the colonel had been killed, thatthe soldier shouting "Brothers!" was a prisoner, and that another manhad been bayoneted in the back before his eyes, for hardly had he runinto the redoubt before a thin, sallow-faced, perspiring man in a blueuniform rushed on him sword in hand, shouting something. Instinctivelyguarding against the shock--for they had been running together at fullspeed before they saw one another--Pierre put out his hands and seizedthe man (a French officer) by the shoulder with one hand and by thethroat with the other. The officer, dropping his sword, seized Pierre byhis collar.For some seconds they gazed with frightened eyes at one another'sunfamiliar faces and both were perplexed at what they had done and whatthey were to do next. "Am I taken prisoner or have I taken himprisoner?" each was thinking. But the French officer was evidently moreinclined to think he had been taken prisoner because Pierre's stronghand, impelled by instinctive fear, squeezed his throat ever tighter andtighter. The Frenchman was about to say something, when just above theirheads, terrible and low, a cannon ball whistled, and it seemed to Pierrethat the French officer's head had been torn off, so swiftly had heducked it.Pierre too bent his head and let his hands fall. Without further thoughtas to who had taken whom prisoner, the Frenchman ran back to the batteryand Pierre ran down the slope stumbling over the dead and wounded who,it seemed to him, caught at his feet. But before he reached the foot ofthe knoll he was met by a dense crowd of Russian soldiers who,stumbling, tripping up, and shouting, ran merrily and wildly toward thebattery. (This was the attack for which Ermolov claimed the credit,declaring that only his courage and good luck made such a feat possible:it was the attack in which he was said to have thrown some St. George'sCrosses he had in his pocket into the battery for the first soldiers totake who got there.)The French who had occupied the battery fled, and our troops shouting"Hurrah!" pursued them so far beyond the battery that it was difficultto call them back.The prisoners were brought down from the battery and among them was awounded French general, whom the officers surrounded. Crowds of wounded--some known to Pierre and some unknown--Russians and French, with facesdistorted by suffering, walked, crawled, and were carried on stretchersfrom the battery. Pierre again went up onto the knoll where he had spentover an hour, and of that family circle which had received him as amember he did not find a single one. There were many dead whom he didnot know, but some he recognized. The young officer still sat in thesame way, bent double, in a pool of blood at the edge of the earth wall.The red-faced man was still twitching, but they did not carry him away.Pierre ran down the slope once more."Now they will stop it, now they will be horrified at what they havedone!" he thought, aimlessly going toward a crowd of stretcher bearersmoving from the battlefield.But behind the veil of smoke the sun was still high, and in front andespecially to the left, near Semenovsk, something seemed to be seethingin the smoke, and the roar of cannon and musketry did not diminish, buteven increased to desperation like a man who, straining himself, shriekswith all his remaining strength.CHAPTER XXXIIIThe chief action of the battle of Borodino was fought within the seventhousand feet between Borodino and Bagration's fleches. Beyond thatspace there was, on the one side, a demonstration made by the Russianswith Uvarov's cavalry at midday, and on the other side, beyond Utitsa,Poniatowski's collision with Tuchkov; but these two were detached andfeeble actions in comparison with what took place in the center of thebattlefield. On the field between Borodino and the fleches, beside thewood, the chief action of the day took place on an open space visiblefrom both sides and was fought in the simplest and most artless way.The battle began on both sides with a cannonade from several hundredguns.Then when the whole field was covered with smoke, two divisions,Campan's and Dessaix's, advanced from the French right, while Murat'stroops advanced on Borodino from their left.From the Shevardino Redoubt where Napoleon was standing the fleches weretwo thirds of a mile away, and it was more than a mile as the crow fliesto Borodino, so that Napoleon could not see what was happening there,especially as the smoke mingling with the mist hid the whole locality.The soldiers of Dessaix's division advancing against the fleches couldonly be seen till they had entered the hollow that lay between them andthe fleches. As soon as they had descended into that hollow, the smokeof the guns and musketry on the fleches grew so dense that it coveredthe whole approach on that side of it. Through the smoke glimpses couldbe caught of something black--probably men--and at times the glint ofbayonets. But whether they were moving or stationary, whether they wereFrench or Russian, could not be discovered from the Shevardino Redoubt.The sun had risen brightly and its slanting rays struck straight intoNapoleon's face as, shading his eyes with his hand, he looked at thefleches. The smoke spread out before them, and at times it looked as ifthe smoke were moving, at times as if the troops moved. Sometimes shoutswere heard through the firing, but it was impossible to tell what wasbeing done there.Napoleon, standing on the knoll, looked through a field glass, and inits small circlet saw smoke and men, sometimes his own and sometimesRussians, but when he looked again with the naked eye, he could not tellwhere what he had seen was.He descended the knoll and began walking up and down before it.Occasionally he stopped, listened to the firing, and gazed intently atthe battlefield.But not only was it impossible to make out what was happening from wherehe was standing down below, or from the knoll above on which some of hisgenerals had taken their stand, but even from the fleches themselves--inwhich by this time there were now Russian and now French soldiers,alternately or together, dead, wounded, alive, frightened, or maddened--even at those fleches themselves it was impossible to make out what wastaking place. There for several hours amid incessant cannon and musketryfire, now Russians were seen alone, now Frenchmen alone, now infantry,and now cavalry: they appeared, fired, fell, collided, not knowing whatto do with one another, screamed, and ran back again.From the battlefield adjutants he had sent out, and orderlies from hismarshals, kept galloping up to Napoleon with reports of the progress ofthe action, but all these reports were false, both because it wasimpossible in the heat of battle to say what was happening at any givenmoment and because many of the adjutants did not go to the actual placeof conflict but reported what they had heard from others; and alsobecause while an adjutant was riding more than a mile to Napoleoncircumstances changed and the news he brought was already becomingfalse. Thus an adjutant galloped up from Murat with tidings thatBorodino had been occupied and the bridge over the Kolocha was in thehands of the French. The adjutant asked whether Napoleon wished thetroops to cross it? Napoleon gave orders that the troops should form upon the farther side and wait. But before that order was given--almost assoon in fact as the adjutant had left Borodino--the bridge had beenretaken by the Russians and burned, in the very skirmish at which Pierrehad been present at the beginning of the battle.An adjutant galloped up from the fleches with a pale and frightened faceand reported to Napoleon that their attack had been repulsed, Campanwounded, and Davout killed; yet at the very time the adjutant had beentold that the French had been repulsed, the fleches had in fact beenrecaptured by other French troops, and Davout was alive and onlyslightly bruised. On the basis of these necessarily untrustworthyreports Napoleon gave his orders, which had either been executed beforehe gave them or could not be and were not executed.The marshals and generals, who were nearer to the field of battle but,like Napoleon, did not take part in the actual fighting and onlyoccasionally went within musket range, made their own arrangementswithout asking Napoleon and issued orders where and in what direction tofire and where cavalry should gallop and infantry should run. But eventheir orders, like Napoleon's, were seldom carried out, and then butpartially. For the most part things happened contrary to their orders.Soldiers ordered to advance ran back on meeting grapeshot; soldiersordered to remain where they were, suddenly, seeing Russiansunexpectedly before them, sometimes rushed back and sometimes forward,and the cavalry dashed without orders in pursuit of the flying Russians.In this way two cavalry regiments galloped through the Semenovsk hollowand as soon as they reached the top of the incline turned round andgalloped full speed back again. The infantry moved in the same way,sometimes running to quite other places than those they were ordered togo to. All orders as to where and when to move the guns, when to sendinfantry to shoot or horsemen to ride down the Russian infantry--allsuch orders were given by the officers on the spot nearest to the unitsconcerned, without asking either Ney, Davout, or Murat, much lessNapoleon. They did not fear getting into trouble for not fulfillingorders or for acting on their own initiative, for in battle what is atstake is what is dearest to man--his own life--and it sometimes seemsthat safety lies in running back, sometimes in running forward; andthese men who were right in the heat of the battle acted according tothe mood of the moment. In reality, however, all these movements forwardand backward did not improve or alter the position of the troops. Alltheir rushing and galloping at one another did little harm, the harm ofdisablement and death was caused by the balls and bullets that flew overthe fields on which these men were floundering about. As soon as theyleft the place where the balls and bullets were flying about, theirsuperiors, located in the background, re-formed them and brought themunder discipline and under the influence of that discipline led themback to the zone of fire, where under the influence of fear of deaththey lost their discipline and rushed about according to the chancepromptings of the throng.CHAPTER XXXIVNapoleon's generals--Davout, Ney, and Murat, who were near that regionof fire and sometimes even entered it--repeatedly led into it hugemasses of well-ordered troops. But contrary to what had always happenedin their former battles, instead of the news they expected of theenemy's flight, these orderly masses returned thence as disorganized andterrified mobs. The generals re-formed them, but their numbersconstantly decreased. In the middle of the day Murat sent his adjutantto Napoleon to demand reinforcements.Napoleon sat at the foot of the knoll, drinking punch, when Murat'sadjutant galloped up with an assurance that the Russians would be routedif His Majesty would let him have another division."Reinforcements?" said Napoleon in a tone of stern surprise, looking atthe adjutant--a handsome lad with long black curls arranged like Murat'sown--as though he did not understand his words."Reinforcements!" thought Napoleon to himself. "How can they needreinforcements when they already have half the army directed against aweak, unentrenched Russian wing?""Tell the King of Naples," said he sternly, "that it is not noon yet,and I don't yet see my chessboard clearly. Go!..."The handsome boy adjutant with the long hair sighed deeply withoutremoving his hand from his hat and galloped back to where men were beingslaughtered.Napoleon rose and having summoned Caulaincourt and Berthier begantalking to them about matters unconnected with the battle.In the midst of this conversation, which was beginning to interestNapoleon, Berthier's eyes turned to look at a general with a suite, whowas galloping toward the knoll on a lathering horse. It was Belliard.Having dismounted he went up to the Emperor with rapid strides and in aloud voice began boldly demonstrating the necessity of sendingreinforcements. He swore on his honor that the Russians were lost if theEmperor would give another division.Napoleon shrugged his shoulders and continued to pace up and downwithout replying. Belliard began talking loudly and eagerly to thegenerals of the suite around him."You are very fiery, Belliard," said Napoleon, when he again came up tothe general. "In the heat of a battle it is easy to make a mistake. Goand have another look and then come back to me."Before Belliard was out of sight, a messenger from another part of thebattlefield galloped up."Now then, what do you want?" asked Napoleon in the tone of a manirritated at being continually disturbed."Sire, the prince..." began the adjutant."Asks for reinforcements?" said Napoleon with an angry gesture.The adjutant bent his head affirmatively and began to report, but theEmperor turned from him, took a couple of steps, stopped, came back, andcalled Berthier."We must give reserves," he said, moving his arms slightly apart. "Whodo you think should be sent there?" he asked of Berthier (whom hesubsequently termed "that gosling I have made an eagle")."Send Claparede's division, sire," replied Berthier, who knew all thedivision's regiments, and battalions by heart.Napoleon nodded assent.The adjutant galloped to Claparede's division and a few minutes laterthe Young Guards stationed behind the knoll moved forward. Napoleongazed silently in that direction."No!" he suddenly said to Berthier. "I can't send Claparede. SendFriant's division."Though there was no advantage in sending Friant's division instead ofClaparede's, and even an obvious inconvenience and delay in stoppingClaparede and sending Friant now, the order was carried out exactly.Napoleon did not notice that in regard to his army he was playing thepart of a doctor who hinders by his medicines--a role he so justlyunderstood and condemned.Friant's division disappeared as the others had done into the smoke ofthe battlefield. From all sides adjutants continued to arrive at agallop and as if by agreement all said the same thing. They all askedfor reinforcements and all said that the Russians were holding theirpositions and maintaining a hellish fire under which the French army wasmelting away.Napoleon sat on a campstool, wrapped in thought.M. de Beausset, the man so fond of travel, having fasted since morning,came up to the Emperor and ventured respectfully to suggest lunch to HisMajesty."I hope I may now congratulate Your Majesty on a victory?" said he.Napoleon silently shook his head in negation. Assuming the negation torefer only to the victory and not to the lunch, M. de Beausset venturedwith respectful jocularity to remark that there is no reason for nothaving lunch when one can get it."Go away..." exclaimed Napoleon suddenly and morosely, and turned aside.A beatific smile of regret, repentance, and ecstasy beamed on M. deBeausset's face and he glided away to the other generals.Napoleon was experiencing a feeling of depression like that of an ever-lucky gambler who, after recklessly flinging money about and alwayswinning, suddenly just when he has calculated all the chances of thegame, finds that the more he considers his play the more surely heloses.His troops were the same, his generals the same, the same preparationshad been made, the same dispositions, and the same proclamation courteet energique, he himself was still the same: he knew that and knew thathe was now even more experienced and skillful than before. Even theenemy was the same as at Austerlitz and Friedland--yet the terriblestroke of his arm had supernaturally become impotent.All the old methods that had been unfailingly crowned with success: theconcentration of batteries on one point, an attack by reserves to breakthe enemy's line, and a cavalry attack by "the men of iron," all thesemethods had already been employed, yet not only was there no victory,but from all sides came the same news of generals killed and wounded, ofreinforcements needed, of the impossibility of driving back theRussians, and of disorganization among his own troops.Formerly, after he had given two or three orders and uttered a fewphrases, marshals and adjutants had come galloping up withcongratulations and happy faces, announcing the trophies taken, thecorps of prisoners, bundles of enemy eagles and standards, cannon andstores, and Murat had only begged leave to loose the cavalry to gatherin the baggage wagons. So it had been at Lodi, Marengo, Arcola, Jena,Austerlitz, Wagram, and so on. But now something strange was happeningto his troops.Despite news of the capture of the fleches, Napoleon saw that this wasnot the same, not at all the same, as what had happened in his formerbattles. He saw that what he was feeling was felt by all the men abouthim experienced in the art of war. All their faces looked dejected, andthey all shunned one another's eyes--only a de Beausset could fail tograsp the meaning of what was happening.But Napoleon with his long experience of war well knew the meaning of abattle not gained by the attacking side in eight hours, after allefforts had been expended. He knew that it was a lost battle and thatthe least accident might now--with the fight balanced on such a strainedcenter--destroy him and his army.When he ran his mind over the whole of this strange Russian campaign inwhich not one battle had been won, and in which not a flag, or cannon,or army corps had been captured in two months, when he looked at theconcealed depression on the faces around him and heard reports of theRussians still holding their ground--a terrible feeling like a nightmaretook possession of him, and all the unlucky accidents that might destroyhim occurred to his mind. The Russians might fall on his left wing,might break through his center, he himself might be killed by a straycannon ball. All this was possible. In former battles he had onlyconsidered the possibilities of success, but now innumerable unluckychances presented themselves, and he expected them all. Yes, it was likea dream in which a man fancies that a ruffian is coming to attack him,and raises his arm to strike that ruffian a terrible blow which he knowsshould annihilate him, but then feels that his arm drops powerless andlimp like a rag, and the horror of unavoidable destruction seizes him inhis helplessness.The news that the Russians were attacking the left flank of the Frencharmy aroused that horror in Napoleon. He sat silently on a campstoolbelow the knoll, with head bowed and elbows on his knees. Berthierapproached and suggested that they should ride along the line toascertain the position of affairs."What? What do you say?" asked Napoleon. "Yes, tell them to bring me myhorse."He mounted and rode toward Semenovsk.Amid the powder smoke, slowly dispersing over the whole space throughwhich Napoleon rode, horses and men were lying in pools of blood, singlyor in heaps. Neither Napoleon nor any of his generals had ever beforeseen such horrors or so many slain in such a small area. The roar ofguns, that had not ceased for ten hours, wearied the ear and gave apeculiar significance to the spectacle, as music does to tableauxvivants. Napoleon rode up the high ground at Semenovsk, and through thesmoke saw ranks of men in uniforms of a color unfamiliar to him. Theywere Russians.The Russians stood in serried ranks behind Semenovsk village and itsknoll, and their guns boomed incessantly along their line and sent forthclouds of smoke. It was no longer a battle: it was a continuousslaughter which could be of no avail either to the French or theRussians. Napoleon stopped his horse and again fell into the reveriefrom which Berthier had aroused him. He could not stop what was going onbefore him and around him and was supposed to be directed by him and todepend on him, and from its lack of success this affair, for the firsttime, seemed to him unnecessary and horrible.One of the generals rode up to Napoleon and ventured to offer to leadthe Old Guard into action. Ney and Berthier, standing near Napoleon,exchanged looks and smiled contemptuously at this general's senselessoffer.Napoleon bowed his head and remained silent a long time."At eight hundred leagues from France, I will not have my Guarddestroyed!" he said, and turning his horse rode back to Shevardino.CHAPTER XXXVOn the rug-covered bench where Pierre had seen him in the morning satKutuzov, his gray head hanging, his heavy body relaxed. He gave noorders, but only assented to or dissented from what others suggested."Yes, yes, do that," he replied to various proposals. "Yes, yes: go,dear boy, and have a look," he would say to one or another of thoseabout him; or, "No, don't, we'd better wait!" He listened to the reportsthat were brought him and gave directions when his subordinates demandedthat of him; but when listening to the reports it seemed as if he werenot interested in the import of the words spoken, but rather insomething else--in the expression of face and tone of voice of those whowere reporting. By long years of military experience he knew, and withthe wisdom of age understood, that it is impossible for one man todirect hundreds of thousands of others struggling with death, and heknew that the result of a battle is decided not by the orders of acommander-in-chief, nor the place where the troops are stationed, nor bythe number of cannon or of slaughtered men, but by that intangible forcecalled the spirit of the army, and he watched this force and guided itin as far as that was in his power.Kutuzov's general expression was one of concentrated quiet attention,and his face wore a strained look as if he found it difficult to masterthe fatigue of his old and feeble body.At eleven o'clock they brought him news that the fleches captured by theFrench had been retaken, but that Prince Bagration was wounded. Kutuzovgroaned and swayed his head."Ride over to Prince Peter Ivanovich and find out about it exactly," hesaid to one of his adjutants, and then turned to the Duke of Wurttembergwho was standing behind him."Will Your Highness please take command of the first army?"Soon after the duke's departure--before he could possibly have reachedSemenovsk--his adjutant came back from him and told Kutuzov that theduke asked for more troops.Kutuzov made a grimace and sent an order to Dokhturov to take over thecommand of the first army, and a request to the duke--whom he said hecould not spare at such an important moment--to return to him. When theybrought him news that Murat had been taken prisoner, and the staffofficers congratulated him, Kutuzov smiled."Wait a little, gentlemen," said he. "The battle is won, and there isnothing extraordinary in the capture of Murat. Still, it is better towait before we rejoice."But he sent an adjutant to take the news round the army.When Scherbinin came galloping from the left flank with news that theFrench had captured the fleches and the village of Semenovsk, Kutuzov,guessing by the sounds of the battle and by Scherbinin's looks that thenews was bad, rose as if to stretch his legs and, taking Scherbinin'sarm, led him aside."Go, my dear fellow," he said to Ermolov, "and see whether somethingcan't be done."Kutuzov was in Gorki, near the center of the Russian position. Theattack directed by Napoleon against our left flank had been severaltimes repulsed. In the center the French had not got beyond Borodino,and on their left flank Uvarov's cavalry had put the French to flight.Toward three o'clock the French attacks ceased. On the faces of all whocame from the field of battle, and of those who stood around him,Kutuzov noticed an expression of extreme tension. He was satisfied withthe day's success--a success exceeding his expectations, but the oldman's strength was failing him. Several times his head dropped low as ifit were falling and he dozed off. Dinner was brought him.Adjutant General Wolzogen, the man who when riding past Prince Andrewhad said, "the war should be extended widely," and whom Bagration sodetested, rode up while Kutuzov was at dinner. Wolzogen had come fromBarclay de Tolly to report on the progress of affairs on the left flank.The sagacious Barclay de Tolly, seeing crowds of wounded men runningback and the disordered rear of the army, weighed all the circumstances,concluded that the battle was lost, and sent his favorite officer to thecommander in chief with that news.Kutuzov was chewing a piece of roast chicken with difficulty and glancedat Wolzogen with eyes that brightened under their puckering lids.Wolzogen, nonchalantly stretching his legs, approached Kutuzov with ahalf-contemptuous smile on his lips, scarcely touching the peak of hiscap.He treated his Serene Highness with a somewhat affected nonchalanceintended to show that, as a highly trained military man, he left it toRussians to make an idol of this useless old man, but that he knew whomhe was dealing with. "Der alte Herr" (as in their own set the Germanscalled Kutuzov) "is making himself very comfortable," thought Wolzogen,and looking severely at the dishes in front of Kutuzov he began toreport to "the old gentleman" the position of affairs on the left flankas Barclay had ordered him to and as he himself had seen and understoodit."All the points of our position are in the enemy's hands and we cannotdislodge them for lack of troops, the men are running away and it isimpossible to stop them," he reported.Kutuzov ceased chewing and fixed an astonished gaze on Wolzogen, as ifnot understanding what was said to him. Wolzogen, noticing "the oldgentleman's" agitation, said with a smile:"I have not considered it right to conceal from your Serene Highnesswhat I have seen. The troops are in complete disorder...""You have seen? You have seen?..." Kutuzov shouted. Frowning and risingquickly, he went up to Wolzogen."How... how dare you!..." he shouted, choking and making a threateninggesture with his trembling arms: "How dare you, sir, say that to me? Youknow nothing about it. Tell General Barclay from me that his informationis incorrect and that the real course of the battle is better known tome, the commander-in-chief, than to him."Wolzogen was about to make a rejoinder, but Kutuzov interrupted him."The enemy has been repulsed on the left and defeated on the rightflank. If you have seen amiss, sir, do not allow yourself to say whatyou don't know! Be so good as to ride to General Barclay and inform himof my firm intention to attack the enemy tomorrow," said Kutuzovsternly.All were silent, and the only sound audible was the heavy breathing ofthe panting old general."They are repulsed everywhere, for which I thank God and our brave army!The enemy is beaten, and tomorrow we shall drive him from the sacredsoil of Russia," said Kutuzov crossing himself, and he suddenly sobbedas his eyes filled with tears.Wolzogen, shrugging his shoulders and curling his lips, stepped silentlyaside, marveling at "the old gentleman's" conceited stupidity."Ah, here he is, my hero!" said Kutuzov to a portly, handsome, dark-haired general who was just ascending the knoll.This was Raevski, who had spent the whole day at the most important partof the field of Borodino.Raevski reported that the troops were firmly holding their ground andthat the French no longer ventured to attack.After hearing him, Kutuzov said in French:"Then you do not think, like some others, that we must retreat?""On the contrary, your Highness, in indecisive actions it is always themost stubborn who remain victors," replied Raevski, "and in myopinion...""Kaysarov!" Kutuzov called to his adjutant. "Sit down and write out theorder of the day for tomorrow. And you," he continued, addressinganother, "ride along the line and announce that tomorrow we attack."While Kutuzov was talking to Raevski and dictating the order of the day,Wolzogen returned from Barclay and said that General Barclay wished tohave written confirmation of the order the field marshal had given.Kutuzov, without looking at Wolzogen, gave directions for the order tobe written out which the former commander-in-chief, to avoid personalresponsibility, very judiciously wished to receive.And by means of that mysterious indefinable bond which maintainsthroughout an army one and the same temper, known as "the spirit of thearmy," and which constitutes the sinew of war, Kutuzov's words, hisorder for a battle next day, immediately became known from one end ofthe army to the other.It was far from being the same words or the same order that reached thefarthest links of that chain. The tales passing from mouth to mouth atdifferent ends of the army did not even resemble what Kutuzov had said,but the sense of his words spread everywhere because what he said wasnot the outcome of cunning calculations, but of a feeling that lay inthe commander-in-chief's soul as in that of every Russian.And on learning that tomorrow they were to attack the enemy, and hearingfrom the highest quarters a confirmation of what they wanted to believe,the exhausted, wavering men felt comforted and inspirited.CHAPTER XXXVIPrince Andrew's regiment was among the reserves which till after oneo'clock were stationed inactive behind Semenovsk, under heavy artilleryfire. Toward two o'clock the regiment, having already lost more than twohundred men, was moved forward into a trampled oatfield in the gapbetween Semenovsk and the Knoll Battery, where thousands of men perishedthat day and on which an intense, concentrated fire from several hundredenemy guns was directed between one and two o'clock.Without moving from that spot or firing a single shot the regiment herelost another third of its men. From in front and especially from theright, in the unlifting smoke the guns boomed, and out of the mysteriousdomain of smoke that overlay the whole space in front, quick hissingcannon balls and slow whistling shells flew unceasingly. At times, as ifto allow them a respite, a quarter of an hour passed during which thecannon balls and shells all flew overhead, but sometimes several menwere torn from the regiment in a minute and the slain were continuallybeing dragged away and the wounded carried off.With each fresh blow less and less chance of life remained for those notyet killed. The regiment stood in columns of battalion, three hundredpaces apart, but nevertheless the men were always in one and the samemood. All alike were taciturn and morose. Talk was rarely heard in theranks, and it ceased altogether every time the thud of a successful shotand the cry of "stretchers!" was heard. Most of the time, by theirofficers' order, the men sat on the ground. One, having taken off hisshako, carefully loosened the gathers of its lining and drew them tightagain; another, rubbing some dry clay between his palms, polished hisbayonet; another fingered the strap and pulled the buckle of hisbandolier, while another smoothed and refolded his leg bands and put hisboots on again. Some built little houses of the tufts in the plowedground, or plaited baskets from the straw in the cornfield. All seemedfully absorbed in these pursuits. When men were killed or wounded, whenrows of stretchers went past, when some troops retreated, and when greatmasses of the enemy came into view through the smoke, no one paid anyattention to these things. But when our artillery or cavalry advanced orsome of our infantry were seen to move forward, words of approval wereheard on all sides. But the liveliest attention was attracted byoccurrences quite apart from, and unconnected with, the battle. It wasas if the minds of these morally exhausted men found relief in everyday,commonplace occurrences. A battery of artillery was passing in front ofthe regiment. The horse of an ammunition cart put its leg over a trace."Hey, look at the trace horse!... Get her leg out! She'll fall.... Ah,they don't see it!" came identical shouts from the ranks all along theregiment. Another time, general attention was attracted by a small browndog, coming heaven knows whence, which trotted in a preoccupied mannerin front of the ranks with tail stiffly erect till suddenly a shell fellclose by, when it yelped, tucked its tail between its legs, and dartedaside. Yells and shrieks of laughter rose from the whole regiment. Butsuch distractions lasted only a moment, and for eight hours the men hadbeen inactive, without food, in constant fear of death, and their paleand gloomy faces grew ever paler and gloomier.Prince Andrew, pale and gloomy like everyone in the regiment, paced upand down from the border of one patch to another, at the edge of themeadow beside an oatfield, with head bowed and arms behind his back.There was nothing for him to do and no orders to be given. Everythingwent on of itself. The killed were dragged from the front, the woundedcarried away, and the ranks closed up. If any soldiers ran to the rearthey returned immediately and hastily. At first Prince Andrew,considering it his duty to rouse the courage of the men and to set theman example, walked about among the ranks, but he soon became convincedthat this was unnecessary and that there was nothing he could teachthem. All the powers of his soul, as of every soldier there, wereunconsciously bent on avoiding the contemplation of the horrors of theirsituation. He walked along the meadow, dragging his feet, rustling thegrass, and gazing at the dust that covered his boots; now he took bigstrides trying to keep to the footprints left on the meadow by themowers, then he counted his steps, calculating how often he must walkfrom one strip to another to walk a mile, then he stripped the flowersfrom the wormwood that grew along a boundary rut, rubbed them in hispalms, and smelled their pungent, sweetly bitter scent. Nothing remainedof the previous day's thoughts. He thought of nothing. He listened withweary ears to the ever-recurring sounds, distinguishing the whistle offlying projectiles from the booming of the reports, glanced at thetiresomely familiar faces of the men of the first battalion, and waited."Here it comes... this one is coming our way again!" he thought,listening to an approaching whistle in the hidden region of smoke. "One,another! Again! It has hit...." He stopped and looked at the ranks. "No,it has gone over. But this one has hit!" And again he started trying toreach the boundary strip in sixteen paces. A whizz and a thud! Fivepaces from him, a cannon ball tore up the dry earth and disappeared. Achill ran down his back. Again he glanced at the ranks. Probably manyhad been hit--a large crowd had gathered near the second battalion."Adjutant!" he shouted. "Order them not to crowd together."The adjutant, having obeyed this instruction, approached Prince Andrew.From the other side a battalion commander rode up."Look out!" came a frightened cry from a soldier and, like a birdwhirring in rapid flight and alighting on the ground, a shell droppedwith little noise within two steps of Prince Andrew and close to thebattalion commander's horse. The horse first, regardless of whether itwas right or wrong to show fear, snorted, reared almost throwing themajor, and galloped aside. The horse's terror infected the men."Lie down!" cried the adjutant, throwing himself flat on the ground.Prince Andrew hesitated. The smoking shell spun like a top between himand the prostrate adjutant, near a wormwood plant between the field andthe meadow."Can this be death?" thought Prince Andrew, looking with a quite new,envious glance at the grass, the wormwood, and the streamlet of smokethat curled up from the rotating black ball. "I cannot, I do not wish todie. I love life--I love this grass, this earth, this air...." Hethought this, and at the same time remembered that people were lookingat him."It's shameful, sir!" he said to the adjutant. "What..."He did not finish speaking. At one and the same moment came the sound ofan explosion, a whistle of splinters as from a breaking window frame, asuffocating smell of powder, and Prince Andrew started to one side,raising his arm, and fell on his chest. Several officers ran up to him.From the right side of his abdomen, blood was welling out making a largestain on the grass.The militiamen with stretchers who were called up stood behind theofficers. Prince Andrew lay on his chest with his face in the grass,breathing heavily and noisily."What are you waiting for? Come along!"The peasants went up and took him by his shoulders and legs, but hemoaned piteously and, exchanging looks, they set him down again."Pick him up, lift him, it's all the same!" cried someone.They again took him by the shoulders and laid him on the stretcher."Ah, God! My God! What is it? The stomach? That means death! My God!"--voices among the officers were heard saying."It flew a hair's breadth past my ear," said the adjutant.The peasants, adjusting the stretcher to their shoulders, startedhurriedly along the path they had trodden down, to the dressing station."Keep in step! Ah... those peasants!" shouted an officer, seizing bytheir shoulders and checking the peasants, who were walking unevenly andjolting the stretcher."Get into step, Fedor... I say, Fedor!" said the foremost peasant."Now that's right!" said the one behind joyfully, when he had got intostep."Your excellency! Eh, Prince!" said the trembling voice of Timokhin, whohad run up and was looking down on the stretcher.Prince Andrew opened his eyes and looked up at the speaker from thestretcher into which his head had sunk deep and again his eyelidsdrooped.The militiamen carried Prince Andrew to the dressing station by thewood, where wagons were stationed. The dressing station consisted ofthree tents with flaps turned back, pitched at the edge of a birch wood.In the wood, wagons and horses were standing. The horses were eatingoats from their movable troughs and sparrows flew down and pecked thegrains that fell. Some crows, scenting blood, flew among the birch treescawing impatiently. Around the tents, over more than five acres,bloodstained men in various garbs stood, sat, or lay. Around the woundedstood crowds of soldier stretcher-bearers with dismal and attentivefaces, whom the officers keeping order tried in vain to drive from thespot. Disregarding the officers' orders, the soldiers stood leaningagainst their stretchers and gazing intently, as if trying to comprehendthe difficult problem of what was taking place before them. From thetents came now loud angry cries and now plaintive groans. Occasionallydressers ran out to fetch water, or to point out those who were to bebrought in next. The wounded men awaiting their turn outside the tentsgroaned, sighed, wept, screamed, swore, or asked for vodka. Some weredelirious. Prince Andrew's bearers, stepping over the wounded who hadnot yet been bandaged, took him, as a regimental commander, close up toone of the tents and there stopped, awaiting instructions. Prince Andrewopened his eyes and for a long time could not make out what was going onaround him. He remembered the meadow, the wormwood, the field, thewhirling black ball, and his sudden rush of passionate love of life. Twosteps from him, leaning against a branch and talking loudly andattracting general attention, stood a tall, handsome, black-hairednoncommissioned officer with a bandaged head. He had been wounded in thehead and leg by bullets. Around him, eagerly listening to his talk, acrowd of wounded and stretcher-bearers was gathered."We kicked him out from there so that he chucked everything, we grabbedthe King himself!" cried he, looking around him with eyes that glitteredwith fever. "If only reserves had come up just then, lads, therewouldn't have been nothing left of him! I tell you surely..."Like all the others near the speaker, Prince Andrew looked at him withshining eyes and experienced a sense of comfort. "But isn't it all thesame now?" thought he. "And what will be there, and what has there beenhere? Why was I so reluctant to part with life? There was something inthis life I did not and do not understand."CHAPTER XXXVIIOne of the doctors came out of the tent in a bloodstained apron, holdinga cigar between the thumb and little finger of one of his smallbloodstained hands, so as not to smear it. He raised his head and lookedabout him, but above the level of the wounded men. He evidently wanted alittle respite. After turning his head from right to left for some time,he sighed and looked down."All right, immediately," he replied to a dresser who pointed PrinceAndrew out to him, and he told them to carry him into the tent.Murmurs arose among the wounded who were waiting."It seems that even in the next world only the gentry are to have achance!" remarked one.Prince Andrew was carried in and laid on a table that had only just beencleared and which a dresser was washing down. Prince Andrew could notmake out distinctly what was in that tent. The pitiful groans from allsides and the torturing pain in his thigh, stomach, and back distractedhim. All he saw about him merged into a general impression of naked,bleeding human bodies that seemed to fill the whole of the low tent, asa few weeks previously, on that hot August day, such bodies had filledthe dirty pond beside the Smolensk road. Yes, it was the same flesh, thesame chair a canon, the sight of which had even then filled him withhorror, as by a presentiment.There were three operating tables in the tent. Two were occupied, and onthe third they placed Prince Andrew. For a little while he was leftalone and involuntarily witnessed what was taking place on the other twotables. On the nearest one sat a Tartar, probably a Cossack, judging bythe uniform thrown down beside him. Four soldiers were holding him, anda spectacled doctor was cutting into his muscular brown back."Ooh, ooh, ooh!" grunted the Tartar, and suddenly lifting up his swarthysnub-nosed face with its high cheekbones, and baring his white teeth, hebegan to wriggle and twitch his body and utter piercing, ringing, andprolonged yells. On the other table, round which many people werecrowding, a tall well-fed man lay on his back with his head thrown back.His curly hair, its color, and the shape of his head seemed strangelyfamiliar to Prince Andrew. Several dressers were pressing on his chestto hold him down. One large, white, plump leg twitched rapidly all thetime with a feverish tremor. The man was sobbing and chokingconvulsively. Two doctors--one of whom was pale and trembling--weresilently doing something to this man's other, gory leg. When he hadfinished with the Tartar, whom they covered with an overcoat, thespectacled doctor came up to Prince Andrew, wiping his hands.He glanced at Prince Andrew's face and quickly turned away."Undress him! What are you waiting for?" he cried angrily to thedressers.His very first, remotest recollections of childhood came back to PrinceAndrew's mind when the dresser with sleeves rolled up began hastily toundo the buttons of his clothes and undressed him. The doctor bent downover the wound, felt it, and sighed deeply. Then he made a sign tosomeone, and the torturing pain in his abdomen caused Prince Andrew tolose consciousness. When he came to himself the splintered portions ofhis thighbone had been extracted, the torn flesh cut away, and the woundbandaged. Water was being sprinkled on his face. As soon as PrinceAndrew opened his eyes, the doctor bent over, kissed him silently on thelips, and hurried away.After the sufferings he had been enduring, Prince Andrew enjoyed ablissful feeling such as he had not experienced for a long time. All thebest and happiest moments of his life--especially his earliestchildhood, when he used to be undressed and put to bed, and when leaningover him his nurse sang him to sleep and he, burying his head in thepillow, felt happy in the mere consciousness of life--returned to hismemory, not merely as something past but as something present.The doctors were busily engaged with the wounded man the shape of whosehead seemed familiar to Prince Andrew: they were lifting him up andtrying to quiet him."Show it to me.... Oh, ooh... Oh! Oh, ooh!" his frightened moans couldbe heard, subdued by suffering and broken by sobs.Hearing those moans Prince Andrew wanted to weep. Whether because he wasdying without glory, or because he was sorry to part with life, orbecause of those memories of a childhood that could not return, orbecause he was suffering and others were suffering and that man near himwas groaning so piteously--he felt like weeping childlike, kindly, andalmost happy tears.The wounded man was shown his amputated leg stained with clotted bloodand with the boot still on."Oh! Oh, ooh!" he sobbed, like a woman.The doctor who had been standing beside him, preventing Prince Andrewfrom seeing his face, moved away."My God! What is this? Why is he here?" said Prince Andrew to himself.In the miserable, sobbing, enfeebled man whose leg had just beenamputated, he recognized Anatole Kuragin. Men were supporting him intheir arms and offering him a glass of water, but his trembling, swollenlips could not grasp its rim. Anatole was sobbing painfully. "Yes, it ishe! Yes, that man is somehow closely and painfully connected with me,"thought Prince Andrew, not yet clearly grasping what he saw before him."What is the connection of that man with my childhood and life?" heasked himself without finding an answer. And suddenly a new unexpectedmemory from that realm of pure and loving childhood presented itself tohim. He remembered Natasha as he had seen her for the first time at theball in 1810, with her slender neck and arms and with a frightened happyface ready for rapture, and love and tenderness for her, stronger andmore vivid than ever, awoke in his soul. He now remembered theconnection that existed between himself and this man who was dimlygazing at him through tears that filled his swollen eyes. He rememberedeverything, and ecstatic pity and love for that man overflowed his happyheart.Prince Andrew could no longer restrain himself and wept tender lovingtears for his fellow men, for himself, and for his own and their errors."Compassion, love of our brothers, for those who love us and for thosewho hate us, love of our enemies; yes, that love which God preached onearth and which Princess Mary taught me and I did not understand--thatis what made me sorry to part with life, that is what remained for mehad I lived. But now it is too late. I know it!"CHAPTER XXXVIIIThe terrible spectacle of the battlefield covered with dead and wounded,together with the heaviness of his head and the news that some twentygenerals he knew personally had been killed or wounded, and theconsciousness of the impotence of his once mighty arm, produced anunexpected impression on Napoleon who usually liked to look at thekilled and wounded, thereby, he considered, testing his strength ofmind. This day the horrible appearance of the battlefield overcame thatstrength of mind which he thought constituted his merit and hisgreatness. He rode hurriedly from the battlefield and returned to theShevardino knoll, where he sat on his campstool, his sallow face swollenand heavy, his eyes dim, his nose red, and his voice hoarse,involuntarily listening, with downcast eyes, to the sounds of firing.With painful dejection he awaited the end of this action, in which heregarded himself as a participant and which he was unable to arrest. Apersonal, human feeling for a brief moment got the better of theartificial phantasm of life he had served so long. He felt in his ownperson the sufferings and death he had witnessed on the battlefield. Theheaviness of his head and chest reminded him of the possibility ofsuffering and death for himself. At that moment he did not desireMoscow, or victory, or glory (what need had he for any more glory?). Theone thing he wished for was rest, tranquillity, and freedom. But when hehad been on the Semenovsk heights the artillery commander had proposedto him to bring several batteries of artillery up to those heights tostrengthen the fire on the Russian troops crowded in front of Knyazkovo.Napoleon had assented and had given orders that news should be broughtto him of the effect those batteries produced.An adjutant came now to inform him that the fire of two hundred guns hadbeen concentrated on the Russians, as he had ordered, but that theystill held their ground."Our fire is mowing them down by rows, but still they hold on," said theadjutant."They want more!..." said Napoleon in a hoarse voice."Sire?" asked the adjutant who had not heard the remark."They want more!" croaked Napoleon frowning. "Let them have it!"Even before he gave that order the thing he did not desire, and forwhich he gave the order only because he thought it was expected of him,was being done. And he fell back into that artificial realm of imaginarygreatness, and again--as a horse walking a treadmill thinks it is doingsomething for itself--he submissively fulfilled the cruel, sad, gloomy,and inhuman role predestined for him.And not for that day and hour alone were the mind and consciencedarkened of this man on whom the responsibility for what was happeninglay more than on all the others who took part in it. Never to the end ofhis life could he understand goodness, beauty, or truth, or thesignificance of his actions which were too contrary to goodness andtruth, too remote from everything human, for him ever to be able tograsp their meaning. He could not disavow his actions, belauded as theywere by half the world, and so he had to repudiate truth, goodness, andall humanity.Not only on that day, as he rode over the battlefield strewn with menkilled and maimed (by his will as he believed), did he reckon as helooked at them how many Russians there were for each Frenchman and,deceiving himself, find reason for rejoicing in the calculation thatthere were five Russians for every Frenchman. Not on that day alone didhe write in a letter to Paris that "the battle field was superb,"because fifty thousand corpses lay there, but even on the island of St.Helena in the peaceful solitude where he said he intended to devote hisleisure to an account of the great deeds he had done, he wrote:The Russian war should have been the most popular war of modern times:it was a war of good sense, for real interests, for the tranquillity andsecurity of all; it was purely pacific and conservative.It was a war for a great cause, the end of uncertainties and thebeginning of security. A new horizon and new labors were opening out,full of well-being and prosperity for all. The European system wasalready founded; all that remained was to organize it.Satisfied on these great points and with tranquility everywhere, I tooshould have had my Congress and my Holy Alliance. Those ideas werestolen from me. In that reunion of great sovereigns we should havediscussed our interests like one family, and have rendered account tothe peoples as clerk to master.Europe would in this way soon have been, in fact, but one people, andanyone who traveled anywhere would have found himself always in thecommon fatherland. I should have demanded the freedom of all navigablerivers for everybody, that the seas should be common to all, and thatthe great standing armies should be reduced henceforth to mere guardsfor the sovereigns.On returning to France, to the bosom of the great, strong, magnificent,peaceful, and glorious fatherland, I should have proclaimed herfrontiers immutable; all future wars purely defensive, allaggrandizement antinational. I should have associated my son in theEmpire; my dictatorship would have been finished, and his constitutionalreign would have begun.Paris would have been the capital of the world, and the French the envyof the nations!My leisure then, and my old age, would have been devoted, in companywith the Empress and during the royal apprenticeship of my son, toleisurely visiting, with our own horses and like a true country couple,every corner of the Empire, receiving complaints, redressing wrongs, andscattering public buildings and benefactions on all sides andeverywhere.Napoleon, predestined by Providence for the gloomy role of executionerof the peoples, assured himself that the aim of his actions had been thepeoples' welfare and that he could control the fate of millions and bythe employment of power confer benefactions."Of four hundred thousand who crossed the Vistula," he wrote further ofthe Russian war, "half were Austrians, Prussians, Saxons, Poles,Bavarians, Wurttembergers, Mecklenburgers, Spaniards, Italians, andNeapolitans. The Imperial army, strictly speaking, was one thirdcomposed of Dutch, Belgians, men from the borders of the Rhine,Piedmontese, Swiss, Genevese, Tuscans, Romans, inhabitants of theThirty-second Military Division, of Bremen, of Hamburg, and so on: itincluded scarcely a hundred and forty thousand who spoke French. TheRussian expedition actually cost France less than fifty thousand men;the Russian army in its retreat from Vilna to Moscow lost in the variousbattles four times more men than the French army; the burning of Moscowcost the lives of a hundred thousand Russians who died of cold and wantin the woods; finally, in its march from Moscow to the Oder the Russianarmy also suffered from the severity of the season; so that by the timeit reached Vilna it numbered only fifty thousand, and at Kalisch lessthan eighteen thousand."He imagined that the war with Russia came about by his will, and thehorrors that occurred did not stagger his soul. He boldly took the wholeresponsibility for what happened, and his darkened mind foundjustification in the belief that among the hundreds of thousands whoperished there were fewer Frenchmen than Hessians and Bavarians.CHAPTER XXXIXSeveral tens of thousands of the slain lay in diverse postures andvarious uniforms on the fields and meadows belonging to the Davydovfamily and to the crown serfs--those fields and meadows where forhundreds of years the peasants of Borodino, Gorki, Shevardino, andSemenovsk had reaped their harvests and pastured their cattle. At thedressing stations the grass and earth were soaked with blood for a spaceof some three acres around. Crowds of men of various arms, wounded andunwounded, with frightened faces, dragged themselves back to Mozhayskfrom the one army and back to Valuevo from the other. Other crowds,exhausted and hungry, went forward led by their officers. Others heldtheir ground and continued to fire.Over the whole field, previously so gaily beautiful with the glitter ofbayonets and cloudlets of smoke in the morning sun, there now spread amist of damp and smoke and a strange acid smell of saltpeter and blood.Clouds gathered and drops of rain began to fall on the dead and wounded,on the frightened, exhausted, and hesitating men, as if to say: "Enough,men! Enough! Cease... bethink yourselves! What are you doing?"To the men of both sides alike, worn out by want of food and rest, itbegan equally to appear doubtful whether they should continue toslaughter one another; all the faces expressed hesitation, and thequestion arose in every soul: "For what, for whom, must I kill and bekilled?... You may go and kill whom you please, but I don't want to doso anymore!" By evening this thought had ripened in every soul. At anymoment these men might have been seized with horror at what they weredoing and might have thrown up everything and run away anywhere.But though toward the end of the battle the men felt all the horror ofwhat they were doing, though they would have been glad to leave off,some incomprehensible, mysterious power continued to control them, andthey still brought up the charges, loaded, aimed, and applied the match,though only one artilleryman survived out of every three, and thoughthey stumbled and panted with fatigue, perspiring and stained with bloodand powder. The cannon balls flew just as swiftly and cruelly from bothsides, crushing human bodies, and that terrible work which was not doneby the will of a man but at the will of Him who governs men and worldscontinued.Anyone looking at the disorganized rear of the Russian army would havesaid that, if only the French made one more slight effort, it woulddisappear; and anyone looking at the rear of the French army would havesaid that the Russians need only make one more slight effort and theFrench would be destroyed. But neither the French nor the Russians madethat effort, and the flame of battle burned slowly out.The Russians did not make that effort because they were not attackingthe French. At the beginning of the battle they stood blocking the wayto Moscow and they still did so at the end of the battle as at thebeginning. But even had the aim of the Russians been to drive the Frenchfrom their positions, they could not have made this last effort, for allthe Russian troops had been broken up, there was no part of the Russianarmy that had not suffered in the battle, and though still holding theirpositions they had lost ONE HALF of their army.The French, with the memory of all their former victories during fifteenyears, with the assurance of Napoleon's invincibility, with theconsciousness that they had captured part of the battlefield and hadlost only a quarter of their men and still had their Guards intact,twenty thousand strong, might easily have made that effort. The Frenchwho had attacked the Russian army in order to drive it from its positionought to have made that effort, for as long as the Russians continued toblock the road to Moscow as before, the aim of the French had not beenattained and all their efforts and losses were in vain. But the Frenchdid not make that effort. Some historians say that Napoleon need onlyhave used his Old Guards, who were intact, and the battle would havebeen won. To speak of what would have happened had Napoleon sent hisGuards is like talking of what would happen if autumn became spring. Itcould not be. Napoleon did not give his Guards, not because he did notwant to, but because it could not be done. All the generals, officers,and soldiers of the French army knew it could not be done, because theflagging spirit of the troops would not permit it.It was not Napoleon alone who had experienced that nightmare feeling ofthe mighty arm being stricken powerless, but all the generals andsoldiers of his army whether they had taken part in the battle or not,after all their experience of previous battles--when after one tenth ofsuch efforts the enemy had fled--experienced a similar feeling of terrorbefore an enemy who, after losing HALF his men, stood as threateninglyat the end as at the beginning of the battle. The moral force of theattacking French army was exhausted. Not that sort of victory which isdefined by the capture of pieces of material fastened to sticks, calledstandards, and of the ground on which the troops had stood and werestanding, but a moral victory that convinces the enemy of the moralsuperiority of his opponent and of his own impotence was gained by theRussians at Borodino. The French invaders, like an infuriated animalthat has in its onslaught received a mortal wound, felt that they wereperishing, but could not stop, any more than the Russian army, weaker byone half, could help swerving. By impetus gained, the French army wasstill able to roll forward to Moscow, but there, without further efforton the part of the Russians, it had to perish, bleeding from the mortalwound it had received at Borodino. The direct consequence of the battleof Borodino was Napoleon's senseless flight from Moscow, his retreatalong the old Smolensk road, the destruction of the invading army offive hundred thousand men, and the downfall of Napoleonic France, onwhich at Borodino for the first time the hand of an opponent of strongerspirit had been laid.BOOK ELEVEN: 1812CHAPTER IAbsolute continuity of motion is not comprehensible to the human mind.Laws of motion of any kind become comprehensible to man only when heexamines arbitrarily selected elements of that motion; but at the sametime, a large proportion of human error comes from the arbitrarydivision of continuous motion into discontinuous elements. There is awell known, so-called sophism of the ancients consisting in this, thatAchilles could never catch up with a tortoise he was following, in spiteof the fact that he traveled ten times as fast as the tortoise. By thetime Achilles has covered the distance that separated him from thetortoise, the tortoise has covered one tenth of that distance ahead ofhim: when Achilles has covered that tenth, the tortoise has coveredanother one hundredth, and so on forever. This problem seemed to theancients insoluble. The absurd answer (that Achilles could neverovertake the tortoise) resulted from this: that motion was arbitrarilydivided into discontinuous elements, whereas the motion both of Achillesand of the tortoise was continuous.By adopting smaller and smaller elements of motion we only approach asolution of the problem, but never reach it. Only when we have admittedthe conception of the infinitely small, and the resulting geometricalprogression with a common ratio of one tenth, and have found the sum ofthis progression to infinity, do we reach a solution of the problem.A modern branch of mathematics having achieved the art of dealing withthe infinitely small can now yield solutions in other more complexproblems of motion which used to appear insoluble.This modern branch of mathematics, unknown to the ancients, when dealingwith problems of motion admits the conception of the infinitely small,and so conforms to the chief condition of motion (absolute continuity)and thereby corrects the inevitable error which the human mind cannotavoid when it deals with separate elements of motion instead ofexamining continuous motion.In seeking the laws of historical movement just the same thing happens.The movement of humanity, arising as it does from innumerable arbitraryhuman wills, is continuous.To understand the laws of this continuous movement is the aim ofhistory. But to arrive at these laws, resulting from the sum of allthose human wills, man's mind postulates arbitrary and disconnectedunits. The first method of history is to take an arbitrarily selectedseries of continuous events and examine it apart from others, thoughthere is and can be no beginning to any event, for one event alwaysflows uninterruptedly from another.The second method is to consider the actions of some one man--a king ora commander--as equivalent to the sum of many individual wills; whereasthe sum of individual wills is never expressed by the activity of asingle historic personage.Historical science in its endeavor to draw nearer to truth continuallytakes smaller and smaller units for examination. But however small theunits it takes, we feel that to take any unit disconnected from others,or to assume a beginning of any phenomenon, or to say that the will ofmany men is expressed by the actions of any one historic personage, isin itself false.It needs no critical exertion to reduce utterly to dust any deductionsdrawn from history. It is merely necessary to select some larger orsmaller unit as the subject of observation--as criticism has every rightto do, seeing that whatever unit history observes must always bearbitrarily selected.Only by taking infinitesimally small units for observation (thedifferential of history, that is, the individual tendencies of men) andattaining to the art of integrating them (that is, finding the sum ofthese infinitesimals) can we hope to arrive at the laws of history.The first fifteen years of the nineteenth century in Europe present anextraordinary movement of millions of people. Men leave their customarypursuits, hasten from one side of Europe to the other, plunder andslaughter one another, triumph and are plunged in despair, and for someyears the whole course of life is altered and presents an intensivemovement which first increases and then slackens. What was the cause ofthis movement, by what laws was it governed? asks the mind of man.The historians, replying to this question, lay before us the sayings anddoings of a few dozen men in a building in the city of Paris, callingthese sayings and doings "the Revolution"; then they give a detailedbiography of Napoleon and of certain people favorable or hostile to him;tell of the influence some of these people had on others, and say: thatis why this movement took place and those are its laws.But the mind of man not only refuses to believe this explanation, butplainly says that this method of explanation is fallacious, because init a weaker phenomenon is taken as the cause of a stronger. The sum ofhuman wills produced the Revolution and Napoleon, and only the sum ofthose wills first tolerated and then destroyed them."But every time there have been conquests there have been conquerors;every time there has been a revolution in any state there have beengreat men," says history. And, indeed, human reason replies: every timeconquerors appear there have been wars, but this does not prove that theconquerors caused the wars and that it is possible to find the laws of awar in the personal activity of a single man. Whenever I look at mywatch and its hands point to ten, I hear the bells of the neighboringchurch; but because the bells begin to ring when the hands of the clockreach ten, I have no right to assume that the movement of the bells iscaused by the position of the hands of the watch.Whenever I see the movement of a locomotive I hear the whistle and seethe valves opening and wheels turning; but I have no right to concludethat the whistling and the turning of wheels are the cause of themovement of the engine.The peasants say that a cold wind blows in late spring because the oaksare budding, and really every spring cold winds do blow when the oak isbudding. But though I do not know what causes the cold winds to blowwhen the oak buds unfold, I cannot agree with the peasants that theunfolding of the oak buds is the cause of the cold wind, for the forceof the wind is beyond the influence of the buds. I see only acoincidence of occurrences such as happens with all the phenomena oflife, and I see that however much and however carefully I observe thehands of the watch, and the valves and wheels of the engine, and theoak, I shall not discover the cause of the bells ringing, the enginemoving, or of the winds of spring. To that I must entirely change mypoint of view and study the laws of the movement of steam, of the bells,and of the wind. History must do the same. And attempts in thisdirection have already been made.To study the laws of history we must completely change the subject ofour observation, must leave aside kings, ministers, and generals, andstudy the common, infinitesimally small elements by which the masses aremoved. No one can say in how far it is possible for man to advance inthis way toward an understanding of the laws of history; but it isevident that only along that path does the possibility of discoveringthe laws of history lie, and that as yet not a millionth part as muchmental effort has been applied in this direction by historians as hasbeen devoted to describing the actions of various kings, commanders, andministers and propounding the historians' own reflections concerningthese actions.CHAPTER IIThe forces of a dozen European nations burst into Russia. The Russianarmy and people avoided a collision till Smolensk was reached, and againfrom Smolensk to Borodino. The French army pushed on to Moscow, itsgoal, its impetus ever increasing as it neared its aim, just as thevelocity of a falling body increases as it approaches the earth. Behindit were seven hundred miles of hunger-stricken, hostile country; aheadwere a few dozen miles separating it from its goal. Every soldier inNapoleon's army felt this and the invasion moved on by its own momentum.The more the Russian army retreated the more fiercely a spirit of hatredof the enemy flared up, and while it retreated the army increased andconsolidated. At Borodino a collision took place. Neither army wasbroken up, but the Russian army retreated immediately after thecollision as inevitably as a ball recoils after colliding with anotherhaving a greater momentum, and with equal inevitability the ball ofinvasion that had advanced with such momentum rolled on for somedistance, though the collision had deprived it of all its force.The Russians retreated eighty miles--to beyond Moscow--and the Frenchreached Moscow and there came to a standstill. For five weeks after thatthere was not a single battle. The French did not move. As a bleeding,mortally wounded animal licks its wounds, they remained inert in Moscowfor five weeks, and then suddenly, with no fresh reason, fled back: theymade a dash for the Kaluga road, and (after a victory--for at Malo-Yaroslavets the field of conflict again remained theirs) withoutundertaking a single serious battle, they fled still more rapidly backto Smolensk, beyond Smolensk, beyond the Berezina, beyond Vilna, andfarther still.On the evening of the twenty-sixth of August, Kutuzov and the wholeRussian army were convinced that the battle of Borodino was a victory.Kutuzov reported so to the Emperor. He gave orders to prepare for afresh conflict to finish the enemy and did this not to deceive anyone,but because he knew that the enemy was beaten, as everyone who had takenpart in the battle knew it.But all that evening and next day reports came in one after another ofunheard-of losses, of the loss of half the army, and a fresh battleproved physically impossible.It was impossible to give battle before information had been collected,the wounded gathered in, the supplies of ammunition replenished, theslain reckoned up, new officers appointed to replace those who had beenkilled, and before the men had had food and sleep. And meanwhile, thevery next morning after the battle, the French army advanced of itselfupon the Russians, carried forward by the force of its own momentum nowseemingly increased in inverse proportion to the square of the distancefrom its aim. Kutuzov's wish was to attack next day, and the whole armydesired to do so. But to make an attack the wish to do so is notsufficient, there must also be a possibility of doing it, and thatpossibility did not exist. It was impossible not to retreat a day'smarch, and then in the same way it was impossible not to retreat anotherand a third day's march, and at last, on the first of September when thearmy drew near Moscow--despite the strength of the feeling that hadarisen in all ranks--the force of circumstances compelled it to retirebeyond Moscow. And the troops retired one more, last, day's march, andabandoned Moscow to the enemy.For people accustomed to think that plans of campaign and battles aremade by generals--as any one of us sitting over a map in his study mayimagine how he would have arranged things in this or that battle--thequestions present themselves: Why did Kutuzov during the retreat not dothis or that? Why did he not take up a position before reaching Fili?Why did he not retire at once by the Kaluga road, abandoning Moscow? andso on. People accustomed to think in that way forget, or do not know,the inevitable conditions which always limit the activities of anycommander in chief. The activity of a commander-in-chief does not at allresemble the activity we imagine to ourselves when we sit at ease in ourstudies examining some campaign on the map, with a certain number oftroops on this and that side in a certain known locality, and begin ourplans from some given moment. A commander-in-chief is never dealing withthe beginning of any event--the position from which we alwayscontemplate it. The commander-in-chief is always in the midst of aseries of shifting events and so he never can at any moment consider thewhole import of an event that is occurring. Moment by moment the eventis imperceptibly shaping itself, and at every moment of this continuous,uninterrupted shaping of events the commander-in-chief is in the midstof a most complex play of intrigues, worries, contingencies,authorities, projects, counsels, threats, and deceptions and iscontinually obliged to reply to innumerable questions addressed to him,which constantly conflict with one another.Learned military authorities quite seriously tell us that Kutuzov shouldhave moved his army to the Kaluga road long before reaching Fili, andthat somebody actually submitted such a proposal to him. But a commanderin chief, especially at a difficult moment, has always before him notone proposal but dozens simultaneously. And all these proposals, basedon strategics and tactics, contradict each other.A commander-in-chief's business, it would seem, is simply to choose oneof these projects. But even that he cannot do. Events and time do notwait. For instance, on the twenty-eighth it is suggested to him to crossto the Kaluga road, but just then an adjutant gallops up fromMiloradovich asking whether he is to engage the French or retire. Anorder must be given him at once, that instant. And the order to retreatcarries us past the turn to the Kaluga road. And after the adjutantcomes the commissary general asking where the stores are to be taken,and the chief of the hospitals asks where the wounded are to go, and acourier from Petersburg brings a letter from the sovereign which doesnot admit of the possibility of abandoning Moscow, and the commander-in-chief's rival, the man who is undermining him (and there are always notmerely one but several such), presents a new project diametricallyopposed to that of turning to the Kaluga road, and the commander-in-chief himself needs sleep and refreshment to maintain his energy and arespectable general who has been overlooked in the distribution ofrewards comes to complain, and the inhabitants of the district pray tobe defended, and an officer sent to inspect the locality comes in andgives a report quite contrary to what was said by the officer previouslysent; and a spy, a prisoner, and a general who has been onreconnaissance, all describe the position of the enemy's armydifferently. People accustomed to misunderstand or to forget theseinevitable conditions of a commander-in-chief's actions describe to us,for instance, the position of the army at Fili and assume that thecommander-in-chief could, on the first of September, quite freely decidewhether to abandon Moscow or defend it; whereas, with the Russian armyless than four miles from Moscow, no such question existed. When hadthat question been settled? At Drissa and at Smolensk and most palpablyof all on the twenty-fourth of August at Shevardino and on the twenty-sixth at Borodino, and each day and hour and minute of the retreat fromBorodino to Fili.CHAPTER IIIWhen Ermolov, having been sent by Kutuzov to inspect the position, toldthe field marshal that it was impossible to fight there before Moscowand that they must retreat, Kutuzov looked at him in silence."Give me your hand," said he and, turning it over so as to feel thepulse, added: "You are not well, my dear fellow. Think what you aresaying!"Kutuzov could not yet admit the possibility of retreating beyond Moscowwithout a battle.On the Poklonny Hill, four miles from the Dorogomilov gate of Moscow,Kutuzov got out of his carriage and sat down on a bench by the roadside.A great crowd of generals gathered round him, and Count Rostopchin, whohad come out from Moscow, joined them. This brilliant company separatedinto several groups who all discussed the advantages and disadvantagesof the position, the state of the army, the plans suggested, thesituation of Moscow, and military questions generally. Though they hadnot been summoned for the purpose, and though it was not so called, theyall felt that this was really a council of war. The conversations alldealt with public questions. If anyone gave or asked for personal news,it was done in a whisper and they immediately reverted to generalmatters. No jokes, or laughter, or smiles even, were seen among allthese men. They evidently all made an effort to hold themselves at theheight the situation demanded. And all these groups, while talking amongthemselves, tried to keep near the commander-in-chief (whose benchformed the center of the gathering) and to speak so that he mightoverhear them. The commander in chief listened to what was being saidand sometimes asked them to repeat their remarks, but did not himselftake part in the conversations or express any opinion. After hearingwhat was being said by one or other of these groups he generally turnedaway with an air of disappointment, as though they were not speaking ofanything he wished to hear. Some discussed the position that had beenchosen, criticizing not the position itself so much as the mentalcapacity of those who had chosen it. Others argued that a mistake hadbeen made earlier and that a battle should have been fought two daysbefore. Others again spoke of the battle of Salamanca, which wasdescribed by Crosart, a newly arrived Frenchman in a Spanish uniform.(This Frenchman and one of the German princes serving with the Russianarmy were discussing the siege of Saragossa and considering thepossibility of defending Moscow in a similar manner.) Count Rostopchinwas telling a fourth group that he was prepared to die with the citytrain bands under the walls of the capital, but that he still could nothelp regretting having been left in ignorance of what was happening, andthat had he known it sooner things would have been different.... A fifthgroup, displaying the profundity of their strategic perceptions,discussed the direction the troops would now have to take. A sixth groupwas talking absolute nonsense. Kutuzov's expression grew more and morepreoccupied and gloomy. From all this talk he saw only one thing: thatto defend Moscow was a physical impossibility in the full meaning ofthose words, that is to say, so utterly impossible that if any senselesscommander were to give orders to fight, confusion would result but thebattle would still not take place. It would not take place because thecommanders not merely all recognized the position to be impossible, butin their conversations were only discussing what would happen after itsinevitable abandonment. How could the commanders lead their troops to afield of battle they considered impossible to hold? The lower-gradeofficers and even the soldiers (who too reason) also considered theposition impossible and therefore could not go to fight, fully convincedas they were of defeat. If Bennigsen insisted on the position beingdefended and others still discussed it, the question was no longerimportant in itself but only as a pretext for disputes and intrigue.This Kutuzov knew well.Bennigsen, who had chosen the position, warmly displayed his Russianpatriotism (Kutuzov could not listen to this without wincing) byinsisting that Moscow must be defended. His aim was as clear as daylightto Kutuzov: if the defense failed, to throw the blame on Kutuzov who hadbrought the army as far as the Sparrow Hills without giving battle; ifit succeeded, to claim the success as his own; or if battle were notgiven, to clear himself of the crime of abandoning Moscow. But thisintrigue did not now occupy the old man's mind. One terrible questionabsorbed him and to that question he heard no reply from anyone. Thequestion for him now was: "Have I really allowed Napoleon to reachMoscow, and when did I do so? When was it decided? Can it have beenyesterday when I ordered Platov to retreat, or was it the eveningbefore, when I had a nap and told Bennigsen to issue orders? Or was itearlier still?... When, when was this terrible affair decided? Moscowmust be abandoned. The army must retreat and the order to do so must begiven." To give that terrible order seemed to him equivalent toresigning the command of the army. And not only did he love power towhich he was accustomed (the honours awarded to Prince Prozorovski,under whom he had served in Turkey, galled him), but he was convincedthat he was destined to save Russia and that that was why, against theEmperor's wish and by the will of the people, he had been chosencommander-in-chief. He was convinced that he alone could maintaincommand of the army in these difficult circumstances, and that in allthe world he alone could encounter the invincible Napoleon without fear,and he was horrified at the thought of the order he had to issue. Butsomething had to be decided, and these conversations around him whichwere assuming too free a character must be stopped.He called the most important generals to him."My head, be it good or bad, must depend on itself," said he, risingfrom the bench, and he rode to Fili where his carriages were waiting.CHAPTER IVThe Council of War began to assemble at two in the afternoon in thebetter and roomier part of Andrew Savostyanov's hut. The men, women, andchildren of the large peasant family crowded into the back room acrossthe passage. Only Malasha, Andrew's six-year-old granddaughter whom hisSerene Highness had petted and to whom he had given a lump of sugarwhile drinking his tea, remained on the top of the brick oven in thelarger room. Malasha looked down from the oven with shy delight at thefaces, uniforms, and decorations of the generals, who one after anothercame into the room and sat down on the broad benches in the corner underthe icons. "Granddad" himself, as Malasha in her own mind calledKutuzov, sat apart in a dark corner behind the oven. He sat, sunk deepin a folding armchair, and continually cleared his throat and pulled atthe collar of his coat which, though it was unbuttoned, still seemed topinch his neck. Those who entered went up one by one to the fieldmarshal; he pressed the hands of some and nodded to others. His adjutantKaysarov was about to draw back the curtain of the window facingKutuzov, but the latter moved his hand angrily and Kaysarov understoodthat his Serene Highness did not wish his face to be seen.Round the peasant's deal table, on which lay maps, plans, pencils, andpapers, so many people gathered that the orderlies brought in anotherbench and put it beside the table. Ermolov, Kaysarov, and Toll, who hadjust arrived, sat down on this bench. In the foremost place, immediatelyunder the icons, sat Barclay de Tolly, his high forehead merging intohis bald crown. He had a St. George's Cross round his neck and lookedpale and ill. He had been feverish for two days and was now shiveringand in pain. Beside him sat Uvarov, who with rapid gesticulations wasgiving him some information, speaking in low tones as they all did.Chubby little Dokhturov was listening attentively with eyebrows raisedand arms folded on his stomach. On the other side sat Count Ostermann-Tolstoy, seemingly absorbed in his own thoughts. His broad head with itsbold features and glittering eyes was resting on his hand. Raevski,twitching forward the black hair on his temples as was his habit,glanced now at Kutuzov and now at the door with a look of impatience.Konovnitsyn's firm, handsome, and kindly face was lit up by a tender,sly smile. His glance met Malasha's, and the expression of his eyescaused the little girl to smile.They were all waiting for Bennigsen, who on the pretext of inspectingthe position was finishing his savory dinner. They waited for him fromfour till six o'clock and did not begin their deliberations all thattime but talked in low tones of other matters.Only when Bennigsen had entered the hut did Kutuzov leave his corner anddraw toward the table, but not near enough for the candles that had beenplaced there to light up his face.Bennigsen opened the council with the question: "Are we to abandonRussia's ancient and sacred capital without a struggle, or are we todefend it?" A prolonged and general silence followed. There was a frownon every face and only Kutuzov's angry grunts and occasional cough brokethe silence. All eyes were gazing at him. Malasha too looked at"Granddad." She was nearest to him and saw how his face puckered; heseemed about to cry, but this did not last long."Russia's ancient and sacred capital!" he suddenly said, repeatingBennigsen's words in an angry voice and thereby drawing attention to thefalse note in them. "Allow me to tell you, your excellency, that thatquestion has no meaning for a Russian." (He lurched his heavy bodyforward.) "Such a question cannot be put; it is senseless! The questionI have asked these gentlemen to meet to discuss is a military one. Thequestion is that of saving Russia. Is it better to give up Moscowwithout a battle, or by accepting battle to risk losing the army as wellas Moscow? That is the question on which I want your opinion," and hesank back in his chair.The discussion began. Bennigsen did not yet consider his game lost.Admitting the view of Barclay and others that a defensive battle at Filiwas impossible, but imbued with Russian patriotism and the love ofMoscow, he proposed to move troops from the right to the left flankduring the night and attack the French right flank the following day.Opinions were divided, and arguments were advanced for and against thatproject. Ermolov, Dokhturov, and Raevski agreed with Bennigsen. Whetherfeeling it necessary to make a sacrifice before abandoning the capitalor guided by other, personal considerations, these generals seemed notto understand that this council could not alter the inevitable course ofevents and that Moscow was in effect already abandoned. The othergenerals, however, understood it and, leaving aside the question ofMoscow, spoke of the direction the army should take in its retreat.Malasha, who kept her eyes fixed on what was going on before her,understood the meaning of the council differently. It seemed to her thatit was only a personal struggle between "Granddad" and "Long-coat" asshe termed Bennigsen. She saw that they grew spiteful when they spoke toone another, and in her heart she sided with "Granddad." In the midst ofthe conversation she noticed "Granddad" give Bennigsen a quick, subtleglance, and then to her joys he saw that "Granddad" said something to"Long-coat" which settled him. Bennigsen suddenly reddened and pacedangrily up and down the room. What so affected him was Kutuzov's calmand quiet comment on the advantage or disadvantage of Bennigsen'sproposal to move troops by night from the right to the left flank toattack the French right wing."Gentlemen," said Kutuzov, "I cannot approve of the count's plan. Movingtroops in close proximity to an enemy is always dangerous, and militaryhistory supports that view. For instance..." Kutuzov seemed to reflect,searching for an example, then with a clear, naive look at Bennigsen headded: "Oh yes; take the battle of Friedland, which I think the countwell remembers, and which was... not fully successful, only because ourtroops were rearranged too near the enemy..."There followed a momentary pause, which seemed very long to them all.The discussion recommenced, but pauses frequently occurred and they allfelt that there was no more to be said.During one of these pauses Kutuzov heaved a deep sigh as if preparing tospeak. They all looked at him."Well, gentlemen, I see that it is I who will have to pay for the brokencrockery," said he, and rising slowly he moved to the table. "Gentlemen,I have heard your views. Some of you will not agree with me. But I," hepaused, "by the authority entrusted to me by my Sovereign and country,order a retreat."After that the generals began to disperse with the solemnity andcircumspect silence of people who are leaving, after a funeral.Some of the generals, in low tones and in a strain very different fromthe way they had spoken during the council, communicated something totheir commander-in-chief.Malasha, who had long been expected for supper, climbed carefullybackwards down from the oven, her bare little feet catching at itsprojections, and slipping between the legs of the generals she dartedout of the room.When he had dismissed the generals Kutuzov sat a long time with hiselbows on the table, thinking always of the same terrible question:"When, when did the abandonment of Moscow become inevitable? When wasthat done which settled the matter? And who was to blame for it?""I did not expect this," said he to his adjutant Schneider when thelatter came in late that night. "I did not expect this! I did not thinkthis would happen.""You should take some rest, your Serene Highness," replied Schneider."But no! They shall eat horseflesh yet, like the Turks!" exclaimedKutuzov without replying, striking the table with his podgy fist. "Theyshall too, if only..."CHAPTER VAt that very time, in circumstances even more important than retreatingwithout a battle, namely the evacuation and burning of Moscow,Rostopchin, who is usually represented as being the instigator of thatevent, acted in an altogether different manner from Kutuzov.After the battle of Borodino the abandonment and burning of Moscow wasas inevitable as the retreat of the army beyond Moscow without fighting.Every Russian might have predicted it, not by reasoning but by thefeeling implanted in each of us and in our fathers.The same thing that took place in Moscow had happened in all the townsand villages on Russian soil beginning with Smolensk, without theparticipation of Count Rostopchin and his broadsheets. The peopleawaited the enemy unconcernedly, did not riot or become excited or tearanyone to pieces, but faced its fate, feeling within it the strength tofind what it should do at that most difficult moment. And as soon as theenemy drew near the wealthy classes went away abandoning their property,while the poorer remained and burned and destroyed what was left.The consciousness that this would be so and would always be so was andis present in the heart of every Russian. And a consciousness of this,and a foreboding that Moscow would be taken, was present in RussianMoscow society in 1812. Those who had quitted Moscow already in July andat the beginning of August showed that they expected this. Those whowent away, taking what they could and abandoning their houses and halftheir belongings, did so from the latent patriotism which expressesitself not by phrases or by giving one's children to save the fatherlandand similar unnatural exploits, but unobtrusively, simply, organically,and therefore in the way that always produces the most powerful results."It is disgraceful to run away from danger; only cowards are runningaway from Moscow," they were told. In his broadsheets Rostopchinimpressed on them that to leave Moscow was shameful. They were ashamedto be called cowards, ashamed to leave, but still they left, knowing ithad to be done. Why did they go? It is impossible to suppose thatRostopchin had scared them by his accounts of horrors Napoleon hadcommitted in conquered countries. The first people to go away were therich educated people who knew quite well that Vienna and Berlin hadremained intact and that during Napoleon's occupation the inhabitantshad spent their time pleasantly in the company of the charming Frenchmenwhom the Russians, and especially the Russian ladies, then liked somuch.They went away because for Russians there could be no question as towhether things would go well or ill under French rule in Moscow. It wasout of the question to be under French rule, it would be the worst thingthat could happen. They went away even before the battle of Borodino andstill more rapidly after it, despite Rostopchin's calls to defend Moscowor the announcement of his intention to take the wonder-working icon ofthe Iberian Mother of God and go to fight, or of the balloons that wereto destroy the French, and despite all the nonsense Rostopchin wrote inhis broadsheets. They knew that it was for the army to fight, and thatif it could not succeed it would not do to take young ladies and houseserfs to the Three Hills quarter of Moscow to fight Napoleon, and thatthey must go away, sorry as they were to abandon their property todestruction. They went away without thinking of the tremendoussignificance of that immense and wealthy city being given over todestruction, for a great city with wooden buildings was certain whenabandoned by its inhabitants to be burned. They went away each on hisown account, and yet it was only in consequence of their going away thatthe momentous event was accomplished that will always remain thegreatest glory of the Russian people. The lady who, afraid of beingstopped by Count Rostopchin's orders, had already in June moved with herNegroes and her women jesters from Moscow to her Saratov estate, with avague consciousness that she was not Bonaparte's servant, was really,simply, and truly carrying out the great work which saved Russia. ButCount Rostopchin, who now taunted those who left Moscow and now had thegovernment offices removed; now distributed quite useless weapons to thedrunken rabble; now had processions displaying the icons, and nowforbade Father Augustin to remove icons or the relics of saints; nowseized all the private carts in Moscow and on one hundred and thirty-sixof them removed the balloon that was being constructed by Leppich; nowhinted that he would burn Moscow and related how he had set fire to hisown house; now wrote a proclamation to the French solemnly upbraidingthem for having destroyed his Orphanage; now claimed the glory of havinghinted that he would burn Moscow and now repudiated the deed; nowordered the people to catch all spies and bring them to him, and nowreproached them for doing so; now expelled all the French residents fromMoscow, and now allowed Madame Aubert-Chalme (the center of the wholeFrench colony in Moscow) to remain, but ordered the venerable oldpostmaster Klyucharev to be arrested and exiled for no particularoffense; now assembled the people at the Three Hills to fight the Frenchand now, to get rid of them, handed over to them a man to be killed andhimself drove away by a back gate; now declared that he would notsurvive the fall of Moscow, and now wrote French verses in albumsconcerning his share in the affair--this man did not understand themeaning of what was happening but merely wanted to do something himselfthat would astonish people, to perform some patriotically heroic feat;and like a child he made sport of the momentous, and unavoidable event--the abandonment and burning of Moscow--and tried with his puny hand nowto speed and now to stay the enormous, popular tide that bore him alongwith it.CHAPTER VIHelene, having returned with the court from Vilna to Petersburg, foundherself in a difficult position.In Petersburg she had enjoyed the special protection of a grandee whooccupied one of the highest posts in the Empire. In Vilna she had formedan intimacy with a young foreign prince. When she returned to Petersburgboth the magnate and the prince were there, and both claimed theirrights. Helene was faced by a new problem--how to preserve her intimacywith both without offending either.What would have seemed difficult or even impossible to another woman didnot cause the least embarrassment to Countess Bezukhova, who evidentlydeserved her reputation of being a very clever woman. Had she attemptedconcealment, or tried to extricate herself from her awkward position bycunning, she would have spoiled her case by acknowledging herselfguilty. But Helene, like a really great man who can do whatever hepleases, at once assumed her own position to be correct, as shesincerely believed it to be, and that everyone else was to blame.The first time the young foreigner allowed himself to reproach her, shelifted her beautiful head and, half turning to him, said firmly: "That'sjust like a man--selfish and cruel! I expected nothing else. A womansacrifices herself for you, she suffers, and this is her reward! Whatright have you, monseigneur, to demand an account of my attachments andfriendships? He is a man who has been more than a father to me!" Theprince was about to say something, but Helene interrupted him."Well, yes," said she, "it may be that he has other sentiments for methan those of a father, but that is not a reason for me to shut my dooron him. I am not a man, that I should repay kindness with ingratitude!Know, monseigneur, that in all that relates to my intimate feelings Irender account only to God and to my conscience," she concluded, layingher hand on her beautiful, fully expanded bosom and looking up toheaven."But for heaven's sake listen to me!""Marry me, and I will be your slave!""But that's impossible.""You won't deign to demean yourself by marrying me, you..." said Helene,beginning to cry.The prince tried to comfort her, but Helene, as if quite distraught,said through her tears that there was nothing to prevent her marrying,that there were precedents (there were up to that time very few, but shementioned Napoleon and some other exalted personages), that she hadnever been her husband's wife, and that she had been sacrificed."But the law, religion..." said the prince, already yielding."The law, religion... What have they been invented for if they can'tarrange that?" said Helene.The prince was surprised that so simple an idea had not occurred to him,and he applied for advice to the holy brethren of the Society of Jesus,with whom he was on intimate terms.A few days later at one of those enchanting fetes which Helene gave ather country house on the Stone Island, the charming Monsieur de Jobert,a man no longer young, with snow white hair and brilliant black eyes, aJesuit a robe courte * was presented to her, and in the garden by thelight of the illuminations and to the sound of music talked to her for along time of the love of God, of Christ, of the Sacred Heart, and of theconsolations the one true Catholic religion affords in this world andthe next. Helene was touched, and more than once tears rose to her eyesand to those of Monsieur de Jobert and their voices trembled. A dance,for which her partner came to seek her, put an end to her discourse withher future directeur de conscience, but the next evening Monsieur deJobert came to see Helene when she was alone, and after that often cameagain.* Lay member of the Society of Jesus.One day he took the countess to a Roman Catholic church, where she kneltdown before the altar to which she was led. The enchanting, middle-agedFrenchman laid his hands on her head and, as she herself afterwarddescribed it, she felt something like a fresh breeze wafted into hersoul. It was explained to her that this was la grace.After that a long-frocked abbe was brought to her. She confessed to him,and he absolved her from her sins. Next day she received a boxcontaining the Sacred Host, which was left at her house for her topartake of. A few days later Helene learned with pleasure that she hadnow been admitted to the true Catholic Church and that in a few days thePope himself would hear of her and would send her a certain document.All that was done around her and to her at this time, all the attentiondevoted to her by so many clever men and expressed in such pleasant,refined ways, and the state of dove-like purity she was now in (she woreonly white dresses and white ribbons all that time) gave her pleasure,but her pleasure did not cause her for a moment to forget her aim. Andas it always happens in contests of cunning that a stupid person getsthe better of cleverer ones, Helene--having realized that the mainobject of all these words and all this trouble was, after converting herto Catholicism, to obtain money from her for Jesuit institutions (as towhich she received indications)-before parting with her money insistedthat the various operations necessary to free her from her husbandshould be performed. In her view the aim of every religion was merely topreserve certain proprieties while affording satisfaction to humandesires. And with this aim, in one of her talks with her FatherConfessor, she insisted on an answer to the question, in how far was shebound by her marriage?They were sitting in the twilight by a window in the drawing room. Thescent of flowers came in at the window. Helene was wearing a whitedress, transparent over her shoulders and bosom. The abbe, a well-fedman with a plump, clean-shaven chin, a pleasant firm mouth, and whitehands meekly folded on his knees, sat close to Helene and, with a subtlesmile on his lips and a peaceful look of delight at her beauty,occasionally glanced at her face as he explained his opinion on thesubject. Helene with an uneasy smile looked at his curly hair and hisplump, clean-shaven, blackish cheeks and every moment expected theconversation to take a fresh turn. But the abbe, though he evidentlyenjoyed the beauty of his companion, was absorbed in his mastery of thematter.The course of the Father Confessor's arguments ran as follows: "Ignorantof the import of what you were undertaking, you made a vow of conjugalfidelity to a man who on his part, by entering the married state withoutfaith in the religious significance of marriage, committed an act ofsacrilege. That marriage lacked the dual significance it should havehad. Yet in spite of this your vow was binding. You swerved from it.What did you commit by so acting? A venial, or a mortal, sin? A venialsin, for you acted without evil intention. If now you married again withthe object of bearing children, your sin might be forgiven. But thequestion is again a twofold one: firstly..."But suddenly Helene, who was getting bored, said with one of herbewitching smiles: "But I think that having espoused the true religion Icannot be bound by what a false religion laid upon me."The director of her conscience was astounded at having the casepresented to him thus with the simplicity of Columbus' egg. He wasdelighted at the unexpected rapidity of his pupil's progress, but couldnot abandon the edifice of argument he had laboriously constructed."Let us understand one another, Countess," said he with a smile, andbegan refuting his spiritual daughter's arguments.CHAPTER VIIHelene understood that the question was very simple and easy from theecclesiastical point of view, and that her directors were makingdifficulties only because they were apprehensive as to how the matterwould be regarded by the secular authorities.So she decided that it was necessary to prepare the opinion of society.She provoked the jealousy of the elderly magnate and told him what shehad told her other suitor; that is, she put the matter so that the onlyway for him to obtain a right over her was to marry her. The elderlymagnate was at first as much taken aback by this suggestion of marriagewith a woman whose husband was alive, as the younger man had been, butHelene's imperturbable conviction that it was as simple and natural asmarrying a maiden had its effect on him too. Had Helene herself shownthe least sign of hesitation, shame, or secrecy, her cause wouldcertainly have been lost; but not only did she show no signs of secrecyor shame, on the contrary, with good-natured naivete she told herintimate friends (and these were all Petersburg) that both the princeand the magnate had proposed to her and that she loved both and wasafraid of grieving either.A rumor immediately spread in Petersburg, not that Helene wanted to bedivorced from her husband (had such a report spread many would haveopposed so illegal an intention) but simply that the unfortunate andinteresting Helene was in doubt which of the two men she should marry.The question was no longer whether this was possible, but only which wasthe better match and how the matter would be regarded at court. Therewere, it is true, some rigid individuals unable to rise to the height ofsuch a question, who saw in the project a desecration of the sacramentof marriage, but there were not many such and they remained silent,while the majority were interested in Helene's good fortune and in thequestion which match would be the more advantageous. Whether it wasright or wrong to remarry while one had a husband living they did notdiscuss, for that question had evidently been settled by people "wiserthan you or me," as they said, and to doubt the correctness of thatdecision would be to risk exposing one's stupidity and incapacity tolive in society.Only Marya Dmitrievna Akhrosimova, who had come to Petersburg thatsummer to see one of her sons, allowed herself plainly to express anopinion contrary to the general one. Meeting Helene at a ball shestopped her in the middle of the room and, amid general silence, said inher gruff voice: "So wives of living men have started marrying again!Perhaps you think you have invented a novelty? You have beenforestalled, my dear! It was thought of long ago. It is done in all thebrothels," and with these words Marya Dmitrievna, turning up her widesleeves with her usual threatening gesture and glancing sternly round,moved across the room.Though people were afraid of Marya Dmitrievna she was regarded inPetersburg as a buffoon, and so of what she had said they only noticed,and repeated in a whisper, the one coarse word she had used, supposingthe whole sting of her remark to lie in that word.Prince Vasili, who of late very often forgot what he had said andrepeated one and the same thing a hundred times, remarked to hisdaughter whenever he chanced to see her:"Helene, I have a word to say to you," and he would lead her aside,drawing her hand downward. "I have heard of certain projectsconcerning... you know. Well my dear child, you know how your father'sheart rejoices to know that you... You have suffered so much.... But, mydear child, consult only your own heart. That is all I have to say," andconcealing his unvarying emotion he would press his cheek against hisdaughter's and move away.Bilibin, who had not lost his reputation of an exceedingly clever man,and who was one of the disinterested friends so brilliant a woman asHelene always has--men friends who can never change into lovers--oncegave her his view of the matter at a small and intimate gathering."Listen, Bilibin," said Helene (she always called friends of that sortby their surnames), and she touched his coat sleeve with her white,beringed fingers. "Tell me, as you would a sister, what I ought to do.Which of the two?"Bilibin wrinkled up the skin over his eyebrows and pondered, with asmile on his lips."You are not taking me unawares, you know," said he. "As a true friend,I have thought and thought again about your affair. You see, if youmarry the prince"--he meant the younger man--and he crooked one finger,"you forever lose the chance of marrying the other, and you willdisplease the court besides. (You know there is some kind ofconnection.) But if you marry the old count you will make his last dayshappy, and as widow of the Grand... the prince would no longer be makinga mesalliance by marrying you," and Bilibin smoothed out his forehead."That's a true friend!" said Helene beaming, and again touchingBilibin's sleeve. "But I love them, you know, and don't want to distresseither of them. I would give my life for the happiness of them both."Bilibin shrugged his shoulders, as much as to say that not even he couldhelp in that difficulty."Une maitresse-femme! * That's what is called putting things squarely.She would like to be married to all three at the same time," thought he.* A masterly woman."But tell me, how will your husband look at the matter?" Bilibin asked,his reputation being so well established that he did not fear to ask sonaive a question. "Will he agree?""Oh, he loves me so!" said Helene, who for some reason imagined thatPierre too loved her. "He will do anything for me."Bilibin puckered his skin in preparation for something witty."Even divorce you?" said he.Helene laughed.Among those who ventured to doubt the justifiability of the proposedmarriage was Helene's mother, Princess Kuragina. She was continuallytormented by jealousy of her daughter, and now that jealousy concerned asubject near to her own heart, she could not reconcile herself to theidea. She consulted a Russian priest as to the possibility of divorceand remarriage during a husband's lifetime, and the priest told her thatit was impossible, and to her delight showed her a text in the Gospelwhich (as it seemed to him) plainly forbids remarriage while the husbandis alive.Armed with these arguments, which appeared to her unanswerable, shedrove to her daughter's early one morning so as to find her alone.Having listened to her mother's objections, Helene smiled blandly andironically."But it says plainly: 'Whosoever shall marry her that is divorced...'"said the old princess."Ah, Maman, ne dites pas de betises. Vous ne comprenez rien. Dans maposition j'ai des devoirs," * said Helene changing from Russian, inwhich language she always felt that her case did not sound quite clear,into French which suited it better.* "Oh, Mamma, don't talk nonsense! You don't understand anything. In myposition I have obligations.""But, my dear....""Oh, Mamma, how is it you don't understand that the Holy Father, who hasthe right to grant dispensations..."Just then the lady companion who lived with Helene came in to announcethat His Highness was in the ballroom and wished to see her."Non, dites-lui que je ne veux pas le voir, que je suis furieuse contrelui, parce qu'il m'a manque parole." ** "No, tell him I don't wish to see him, I am furious with him for notkeeping his word to me.""Comtesse, a tout peche misericorde," * said a fair-haired young manwith a long face and nose, as he entered the room.* "Countess, there is mercy for every sin."The old princess rose respectfully and curtsied. The young man who hadentered took no notice of her. The princess nodded to her daughter andsidled out of the room."Yes, she is right," thought the old princess, all her convictionsdissipated by the appearance of His Highness. "She is right, but how isit that we in our irrecoverable youth did not know it? Yet it is sosimple," she thought as she got into her carriage.By the beginning of August Helene's affairs were clearly defined and shewrote a letter to her husband--who, as she imagined, loved her verymuch--informing him of her intention to marry N.N. and of her havingembraced the one true faith, and asking him to carry out all theformalities necessary for a divorce, which would be explained to him bythe bearer of the letter.And so I pray God to have you, my friend, in His holy and powerfulkeeping--Your friend Helene.This letter was brought to Pierre's house when he was on the field ofBorodino.CHAPTER VIIIToward the end of the battle of Borodino, Pierre, having run down fromRaevski's battery a second time, made his way through a gully toKnyazkovo with a crowd of soldiers, reached the dressing station, andseeing blood and hearing cries and groans hurried on, still entangled inthe crowds of soldiers.The one thing he now desired with his whole soul was to get away quicklyfrom the terrible sensations amid which he had lived that day and returnto ordinary conditions of life and sleep quietly in a room in his ownbed. He felt that only in the ordinary conditions of life would he beable to understand himself and all he had seen and felt. But suchordinary conditions of life were nowhere to be found.Though shells and bullets did not whistle over the road along which hewas going, still on all sides there was what there had been on the fieldof battle. There were still the same suffering, exhausted, and sometimesstrangely indifferent faces, the same blood, the same soldiers'overcoats, the same sounds of firing which, though distant now, stillaroused terror, and besides this there were the foul air and the dust.Having gone a couple of miles along the Mozhaysk road, Pierre sat downby the roadside.Dusk had fallen, and the roar of guns died away. Pierre lay leaning onhis elbow for a long time, gazing at the shadows that moved past him inthe darkness. He was continually imagining that a cannon ball was flyingtoward him with a terrific whizz, and then he shuddered and sat up. Hehad no idea how long he had been there. In the middle of the night threesoldiers, having brought some firewood, settled down near him and beganlighting a fire.The soldiers, who threw sidelong glances at Pierre, got the fire to burnand placed an iron pot on it into which they broke some dried bread andput a little dripping. The pleasant odor of greasy viands mingled withthe smell of smoke. Pierre sat up and sighed. The three soldiers wereeating and talking among themselves, taking no notice of him."And who may you be?" one of them suddenly asked Pierre, evidentlymeaning what Pierre himself had in mind, namely: "If you want to eatwe'll give you some food, only let us know whether you are an honestman.""I, I..." said Pierre, feeling it necessary to minimize his socialposition as much as possible so as to be nearer to the soldiers andbetter understood by them. "By rights I am a militia officer, but my menare not here. I came to the battle and have lost them.""There now!" said one of the soldiers.Another shook his head."Would you like a little mash?" the first soldier asked, and handedPierre a wooden spoon after licking it clean.Pierre sat down by the fire and began eating the mash, as they calledthe food in the cauldron, and he thought it more delicious than any foodhe had ever tasted. As he sat bending greedily over it, helping himselfto large spoonfuls and chewing one after another, his face was lit up bythe fire and the soldiers looked at him in silence."Where have you to go to? Tell us!" said one of them."To Mozhaysk.""You're a gentleman, aren't you?""Yes.""And what's your name?""Peter Kirilych.""Well then, Peter Kirilych, come along with us, we'll take you there."In the total darkness the soldiers walked with Pierre to Mozhaysk.By the time they got near Mozhaysk and began ascending the steep hillinto the town, the cocks were already crowing. Pierre went on with thesoldiers, quite forgetting that his inn was at the bottom of the hilland that he had already passed it. He would not soon have rememberedthis, such was his state of forgetfulness, had he not halfway up thehill stumbled upon his groom, who had been to look for him in the townand was returning to the inn. The groom recognized Pierre in thedarkness by his white hat."Your excellency!" he said. "Why, we were beginning to despair! How isit you are on foot? And where are you going, please?""Oh, yes!" said Pierre.The soldiers stopped."So you've found your folk?" said one of them. "Well, good-by, PeterKirilych--isn't it?""Good-bye, Peter Kirilych!" Pierre heard the other voices repeat."Good-bye!" he said and turned with his groom toward the inn."I ought to give them something!" he thought, and felt in his pocket."No, better not!" said another, inner voice.There was not a room to be had at the inn, they were all occupied.Pierre went out into the yard and, covering himself up head and all, laydown in his carriage.CHAPTER IXScarcely had Pierre laid his head on the pillow before he felt himselffalling asleep, but suddenly, almost with the distinctness of reality,he heard the boom, boom, boom of firing, the thud of projectiles, groansand cries, and smelled blood and powder, and a feeling of horror anddread of death seized him. Filled with fright he opened his eyes andlifted his head from under his cloak. All was tranquil in the yard. Onlysomeone's orderly passed through the gateway, splashing through the mud,and talked to the innkeeper. Above Pierre's head some pigeons, disturbedby the movement he had made in sitting up, fluttered under the dark roofof the penthouse. The whole courtyard was permeated by a strong peacefulsmell of stable yards, delightful to Pierre at that moment. He could seethe clear starry sky between the dark roofs of two penthouses."Thank God, there is no more of that!" he thought, covering up his headagain. "Oh, what a terrible thing is fear, and how shamefully I yieldedto it! But they... they were steady and calm all the time, to theend..." thought he.They, in Pierre's mind, were the soldiers, those who had been at thebattery, those who had given him food, and those who had prayed beforethe icon. They, those strange men he had not previously known, stood outclearly and sharply from everyone else."To be a soldier, just a soldier!" thought Pierre as he fell asleep, "toenter communal life completely, to be imbued by what makes them whatthey are. But how cast off all the superfluous, devilish burden of myouter man? There was a time when I could have done it. I could have runaway from my father, as I wanted to. Or I might have been sent to serveas a soldier after the duel with Dolokhov." And the memory of the dinnerat the English Club when he had challenged Dolokhov flashed throughPierre's mind, and then he remembered his benefactor at Torzhok. And nowa picture of a solemn meeting of the lodge presented itself to his mind.It was taking place at the English Club and someone near and dear to himsat at the end of the table. "Yes, that is he! It is my benefactor. Buthe died!" thought Pierre. "Yes, he died, and I did not know he wasalive. How sorry I am that he died, and how glad I am that he is aliveagain!" On one side of the table sat Anatole, Dolokhov, Nesvitski,Denisov, and others like them (in his dream the category to which thesemen belonged was as clearly defined in his mind as the category of thosehe termed they), and he heard those people, Anatole and Dolokhov,shouting and singing loudly; yet through their shouting the voice of hisbenefactor was heard speaking all the time and the sound of his wordswas as weighty and uninterrupted as the booming on the battlefield, butpleasant and comforting. Pierre did not understand what his benefactorwas saying, but he knew (the categories of thoughts were also quitedistinct in his dream) that he was talking of goodness and thepossibility of being what they were. And they with their simple, kind,firm faces surrounded his benefactor on all sides. But though they werekindly they did not look at Pierre and did not know him. Wishing tospeak and to attract their attention, he got up, but at that moment hislegs grew cold and bare.He felt ashamed, and with one arm covered his legs from which his cloakhad in fact slipped. For a moment as he was rearranging his cloak Pierreopened his eyes and saw the same penthouse roofs, posts, and yard, butnow they were all bluish, lit up, and glittering with frost or dew."It is dawn," thought Pierre. "But that's not what I want. I want tohear and understand my benefactor's words." Again he covered himself upwith his cloak, but now neither the lodge nor his benefactor was there.There were only thoughts clearly expressed in words, thoughts thatsomeone was uttering or that he himself was formulating.Afterwards when he recalled those thoughts Pierre was convinced thatsomeone outside himself had spoken them, though the impressions of thatday had evoked them. He had never, it seemed to him, been able to thinkand express his thoughts like that when awake."To endure war is the most difficult subordination of man's freedom tothe law of God," the voice had said. "Simplicity is submission to thewill of God; you cannot escape from Him. And they are simple. They donot talk, but act. The spoken word is silver but the unspoken is golden.Man can be master of nothing while he fears death, but he who does notfear it possesses all. If there were no suffering, man would not knowhis limitations, would not know himself. The hardest thing (Pierre wenton thinking, or hearing, in his dream) is to be able in your soul tounite the meaning of all. To unite all?" he asked himself. "No, not tounite. Thoughts cannot be united, but to harness all these thoughtstogether is what we need! Yes, one must harness them, must harnessthem!" he repeated to himself with inward rapture, feeling that thesewords and they alone expressed what he wanted to say and solved thequestion that tormented him."Yes, one must harness, it is time to harness.""Time to harness, time to harness, your excellency! Your excellency!"some voice was repeating. "We must harness, it is time to harness...."It was the voice of the groom, trying to wake him. The sun shonestraight into Pierre's face. He glanced at the dirty innyard in themiddle of which soldiers were watering their lean horses at the pumpwhile carts were passing out of the gate. Pierre turned away withrepugnance, and closing his eyes quickly fell back on the carriage seat."No, I don't want that, I don't want to see and understand that. I wantto understand what was revealing itself to me in my dream. One secondmore and I should have understood it all! But what am I to do? Harness,but how can I harness everything?" and Pierre felt with horror that themeaning of all he had seen and thought in the dream had been destroyed.The groom, the coachman, and the innkeeper told Pierre that an officerhad come with news that the French were already near Mozhaysk and thatour men were leaving it.Pierre got up and, having told them to harness and overtake him, went onfoot through the town.The troops were moving on, leaving about ten thousand wounded behindthem. There were wounded in the yards, at the windows of the houses, andthe streets were crowded with them. In the streets, around carts thatwere to take some of the wounded away, shouts, curses, and blows couldbe heard. Pierre offered the use of his carriage, which had overtakenhim, to a wounded general he knew, and drove with him to Moscow. On theway Pierre was told of the death of his brother-in-law Anatole and ofthat of Prince Andrew.CHAPTER XOn the thirteenth of August Pierre reached Moscow. Close to the gates ofthe city he was met by Count Rostopchin's adjutant."We have been looking for you everywhere," said the adjutant. "The countwants to see you particularly. He asks you to come to him at once on avery important matter."Without going home, Pierre took a cab and drove to see the Moscowcommander-in-chief.Count Rostopchin had only that morning returned to town from his summervilla at Sokolniki. The anteroom and reception room of his house werefull of officials who had been summoned or had come for orders.Vasilchikov and Platov had already seen the count and explained to himthat it was impossible to defend Moscow and that it would have to besurrendered. Though this news was being concealed from the inhabitants,the officials--the heads of the various government departments--knewthat Moscow would soon be in the enemy's hands, just as Count Rostopchinhimself knew it, and to escape personal responsibility they had all cometo the governor to ask how they were to deal with their variousdepartments.As Pierre was entering the reception room a courier from the army cameout of Rostopchin's private room.In answer to questions with which he was greeted, the courier made adespairing gesture with his hand and passed through the room.While waiting in the reception room Pierre with weary eyes watched thevarious officials, old and young, military and civilian, who were there.They all seemed dissatisfied and uneasy. Pierre went up to a group ofmen, one of whom he knew. After greeting Pierre they continued theirconversation."If they're sent out and brought back again later on it will do no harm,but as things are now one can't answer for anything.""But you see what he writes..." said another, pointing to a printedsheet he held in his hand."That's another matter. That's necessary for the people," said thefirst."What is it?" asked Pierre."Oh, it's a fresh broadsheet."Pierre took it and began reading.His Serene Highness has passed through Mozhaysk in order to join up withthe troops moving toward him and has taken up a strong position wherethe enemy will not soon attack him. Forty eight guns with ammunitionhave been sent him from here, and his Serene Highness says he willdefend Moscow to the last drop of blood and is even ready to fight inthe streets. Do not be upset, brothers, that the law courts are closed;things have to be put in order, and we will deal with villains in ourown way! When the time comes I shall want both town and peasant lads andwill raise the cry a day or two beforehand, but they are not wanted yetso I hold my peace. An ax will be useful, a hunting spear not bad, but athree-pronged fork will be best of all: a Frenchman is no heavier than asheaf of rye. Tomorrow after dinner I shall take the Iberian icon of theMother of God to the wounded in the Catherine Hospital where we willhave some water blessed. That will help them to get well quicker. I,too, am well now: one of my eyes was sore but now I am on the lookoutwith both."But military men have told me that it is impossible to fight in thetown," said Pierre, "and that the position...""Well, of course! That's what we were saying," replied the firstspeaker."And what does he mean by 'One of my eyes was sore but now I am on thelookout with both'?" asked Pierre."The count had a sty," replied the adjutant smiling, "and was very muchupset when I told him people had come to ask what was the matter withhim. By the by, Count," he added suddenly, addressing Pierre with asmile, "we heard that you have family troubles and that the countess,your wife...""I have heard nothing," Pierre replied unconcernedly. "But what have youheard?""Oh, well, you know people often invent things. I only say what Iheard.""But what did you hear?""Well, they say," continued the adjutant with the same smile, "that thecountess, your wife, is preparing to go abroad. I expect it'snonsense....""Possibly," remarked Pierre, looking about him absent-mindedly. "And whois that?" he asked, indicating a short old man in a clean blue peasantovercoat, with a big snow-white beard and eyebrows and a ruddy face."He? That's a tradesman, that is to say, he's the restaurant keeper,Vereshchagin. Perhaps you have heard of that affair with theproclamation.""Oh, so that is Vereshchagin!" said Pierre, looking at the firm, calmface of the old man and seeking any indication of his being a traitor."That's not he himself, that's the father of the fellow who wrote theproclamation," said the adjutant. "The young man is in prison and Iexpect it will go hard with him."An old gentleman wearing a star and another official, a German wearing across round his neck, approached the speaker."It's a complicated story, you know," said the adjutant. "Thatproclamation appeared about two months ago. The count was informed ofit. He gave orders to investigate the matter. Gabriel Ivanovich heremade the inquiries. The proclamation had passed through exactly sixty-three hands. He asked one, 'From whom did you get it?' 'From so-and-so.'He went to the next one. 'From whom did you get it?' and so on till hereached Vereshchagin, a half educated tradesman, you know, 'a pet of atrader,'" said the adjutant smiling. "They asked him, 'Who gave it you?'And the point is that we knew whom he had it from. He could only havehad it from the Postmaster. But evidently they had come to someunderstanding. He replied: 'From no one; I made it up myself.' Theythreatened and questioned him, but he stuck to that: 'I made it upmyself.' And so it was reported to the count, who sent for the man.'From whom did you get the proclamation?' 'I wrote it myself.' Well, youknow the count," said the adjutant cheerfully, with a smile of pride,"he flared up dreadfully--and just think of the fellow's audacity,lying, and obstinacy!""And the count wanted him to say it was from Klyucharev? I understand!"said Pierre."Not at all," rejoined the adjutant in dismay. "Klyucharev had his ownsins to answer for without that and that is why he has been banished.But the point is that the count was much annoyed. 'How could you havewritten it yourself?' said he, and he took up the Hamburg Gazette thatwas lying on the table. 'Here it is! You did not write it yourself buttranslated it, and translated it abominably, because you don't even knowFrench, you fool.' And what do you think? 'No,' said he, 'I have notread any papers, I made it up myself.' 'If that's so, you're a traitorand I'll have you tried, and you'll be hanged! Say from whom you hadit.' 'I have seen no papers, I made it up myself.' And that was the endof it. The count had the father fetched, but the fellow stuck to it. Hewas sent for trial and condemned to hard labor, I believe. Now thefather has come to intercede for him. But he's a good-for-nothing lad!You know that sort of tradesman's son, a dandy and lady-killer. Heattended some lectures somewhere and imagines that the devil is no matchfor him. That's the sort of fellow he is. His father keeps a cookshophere by the Stone Bridge, and you know there was a large icon of GodAlmighty painted with a scepter in one hand and an orb in the other.Well, he took that icon home with him for a few days and what did he do?He found some scoundrel of a painter..."CHAPTER XIIn the middle of this fresh tale Pierre was summoned to the commander inchief.When he entered the private room Count Rostopchin, puckering his face,was rubbing his forehead and eyes with his hand. A short man was sayingsomething, but when Pierre entered he stopped speaking and went out."Ah, how do you do, great warrior?" said Rostopchin as soon as the shortman had left the room. "We have heard of your prowess. But that's notthe point. Between ourselves, mon cher, do you belong to the Masons?" hewent on severely, as though there were something wrong about it which henevertheless intended to pardon. Pierre remained silent. "I am wellinformed, my friend, but I am aware that there are Masons and I hopethat you are not one of those who on pretense of saving mankind wish toruin Russia.""Yes, I am a Mason," Pierre replied."There, you see, mon cher! I expect you know that Messrs. Speranski andMagnitski have been deported to their proper place. Mr. Klyucharev hasbeen treated in the same way, and so have others who on the plea ofbuilding up the temple of Solomon have tried to destroy the temple oftheir fatherland. You can understand that there are reasons for this andthat I could not have exiled the Postmaster had he not been a harmfulperson. It has now come to my knowledge that you lent him your carriagefor his removal from town, and that you have even accepted papers fromhim for safe custody. I like you and don't wish you any harm and--as youare only half my age--I advise you, as a father would, to cease allcommunication with men of that stamp and to leave here as soon aspossible.""But what did Klyucharev do wrong, Count?" asked Pierre."That is for me to know, but not for you to ask," shouted Rostopchin."If he is accused of circulating Napoleon's proclamation it is notproved that he did so," said Pierre without looking at Rostopchin, "andVereshchagin...""There we are!" Rostopchin shouted at Pierre louder than before,frowning suddenly. "Vereshchagin is a renegade and a traitor who will bepunished as he deserves," said he with the vindictive heat with whichpeople speak when recalling an insult. "But I did not summon you todiscuss my actions, but to give you advice--or an order if you preferit. I beg you to leave the town and break off all communication withsuch men as Klyucharev. And I will knock the nonsense out of anybody"--but probably realizing that he was shouting at Bezukhov who so far wasnot guilty of anything, he added, taking Pierre's hand in a friendlymanner, "We are on the eve of a public disaster and I haven't time to bepolite to everybody who has business with me. My head is sometimes in awhirl. Well, mon cher, what are you doing personally?""Why, nothing," answered Pierre without raising his eyes or changing thethoughtful expression of his face.The count frowned."A word of friendly advice, mon cher. Be off as soon as you can, that'sall I have to tell you. Happy he who has ears to hear. Good-bye, my dearfellow. Oh, by the by!" he shouted through the doorway after Pierre, "isit true that the countess has fallen into the clutches of the holyfathers of the Society of Jesus?"Pierre did not answer and left Rostopchin's room more sullen and angrythan he had ever before shown himself.When he reached home it was already getting dark. Some eight people hadcome to see him that evening: the secretary of a committee, the colonelof his battalion, his steward, his major-domo, and various petitioners.They all had business with Pierre and wanted decisions from him. Pierredid not understand and was not interested in any of these questions andonly answered them in order to get rid of these people. When left aloneat last he opened and read his wife's letter."They, the soldiers at the battery, Prince Andrew killed... that oldman... Simplicity is submission to God. Suffering is necessary... themeaning of all... one must harness... my wife is getting married... Onemust forget and understand..." And going to his bed he threw himself onit without undressing and immediately fell asleep.When he awoke next morning the major-domo came to inform him that aspecial messenger, a police officer, had come from Count Rostopchin toknow whether Count Bezukhov had left or was leaving the town.A dozen persons who had business with Pierre were awaiting him in thedrawing room. Pierre dressed hurriedly and, instead of going to seethem, went to the back porch and out through the gate.From that time till the end of the destruction of Moscow no one ofBezukhov's household, despite all the search they made, saw Pierre againor knew where he was.CHAPTER XIIThe Rostovs remained in Moscow till the first of September, that is,till the eve of the enemy's entry into the city.After Petya had joined Obolenski's regiment of Cossacks and left forBelaya Tserkov where that regiment was forming, the countess was seizedwith terror. The thought that both her sons were at the war, had bothgone from under her wing, that today or tomorrow either or both of themmight be killed like the three sons of one of her acquaintances, struckher that summer for the first time with cruel clearness. She tried toget Nicholas back and wished to go herself to join Petya, or to get himan appointment somewhere in Petersburg, but neither of these provedpossible. Petya could not return unless his regiment did so or unless hewas transferred to another regiment on active service. Nicholas wassomewhere with the army and had not sent a word since his last letter,in which he had given a detailed account of his meeting with PrincessMary. The countess did not sleep at night, or when she did fall asleepdreamed that she saw her sons lying dead. After many consultations andconversations, the count at last devised means to tranquillize her. Hegot Petya transferred from Obolenski's regiment to Bezukhov's, which wasin training near Moscow. Though Petya would remain in the service, thistransfer would give the countess the consolation of seeing at least oneof her sons under her wing, and she hoped to arrange matters for herPetya so as not to let him go again, but always get him appointed toplaces where he could not possibly take part in a battle. As long asNicholas alone was in danger the countess imagined that she loved herfirst-born more than all her other children and even reproached herselffor it; but when her youngest: the scapegrace who had been bad atlessons, was always breaking things in the house and making himself anuisance to everybody, that snub-nosed Petya with his merry black eyesand fresh rosy cheeks where soft down was just beginning to show--whenhe was thrown amid those big, dreadful, cruel men who were fightingsomewhere about something and apparently finding pleasure in it--thenhis mother thought she loved him more, much more, than all her otherchildren. The nearer the time came for Petya to return, the more uneasygrew the countess. She began to think she would never live to see suchhappiness. The presence of Sonya, of her beloved Natasha, or even of herhusband irritated her. "What do I want with them? I want no one butPetya," she thought.At the end of August the Rostovs received another letter from Nicholas.He wrote from the province of Voronezh where he had been sent to procureremounts, but that letter did not set the countess at ease. Knowing thatone son was out of danger she became the more anxious about Petya.Though by the twentieth of August nearly all the Rostovs' acquaintanceshad left Moscow, and though everybody tried to persuade the countess toget away as quickly as possible, she would not hear of leaving beforeher treasure, her adored Petya, returned. On the twenty-eighth of Augusthe arrived. The passionate tenderness with which his mother received himdid not please the sixteen-year-old officer. Though she concealed fromhim her intention of keeping him under her wing, Petya guessed herdesigns, and instinctively fearing that he might give way to emotionwhen with her--might "become womanish" as he termed it to himself--hetreated her coldly, avoided her, and during his stay in Moscow attachedhimself exclusively to Natasha for whom he had always had a particularlybrotherly tenderness, almost lover-like.Owing to the count's customary carelessness nothing was ready for theirdeparture by the twenty-eighth of August and the carts that were to comefrom their Ryazan and Moscow estates to remove their householdbelongings did not arrive till the thirtieth.From the twenty-eighth till the thirty-first all Moscow was in a bustleand commotion. Every day thousands of men wounded at Borodino werebrought in by the Dorogomilov gate and taken to various parts of Moscow,and thousands of carts conveyed the inhabitants and their possessionsout by the other gates. In spite of Rostopchin's broadsheets, or becauseof them or independently of them, the strangest and most contradictoryrumors were current in the town. Some said that no one was to be allowedto leave the city, others on the contrary said that all the icons hadbeen taken out of the churches and everybody was to be ordered to leave.Some said there had been another battle after Borodino at which theFrench had been routed, while others on the contrary reported that theRussian army had been destroyed. Some talked about the Moscow militiawhich, preceded by the clergy, would go to the Three Hills; otherswhispered that Augustin had been forbidden to leave, that traitors hadbeen seized, that the peasants were rioting and robbing people on theirway from Moscow, and so on. But all this was only talk; in reality(though the Council of Fili, at which it was decided to abandon Moscow,had not yet been held) both those who went away and those who remainedbehind felt, though they did not show it, that Moscow would certainly beabandoned, and that they ought to get away as quickly as possible andsave their belongings. It was felt that everything would suddenly breakup and change, but up to the first of September nothing had done so. Asa criminal who is being led to execution knows that he must dieimmediately, but yet looks about him and straightens the cap that isawry on his head, so Moscow involuntarily continued its wonted life,though it knew that the time of its destruction was near when theconditions of life to which its people were accustomed to submit wouldbe completely upset.During the three days preceding the occupation of Moscow the wholeRostov family was absorbed in various activities. The head of thefamily, Count Ilya Rostov, continually drove about the city collectingthe current rumors from all sides and gave superficial and hasty ordersat home about the preparations for their departure.The countess watched the things being packed, was dissatisfied witheverything, was constantly in pursuit of Petya who was always runningaway from her, and was jealous of Natasha with whom he spent all histime. Sonya alone directed the practical side of matters by gettingthings packed. But of late Sonya had been particularly sad and silent.Nicholas' letter in which he mentioned Princess Mary had elicited, inher presence, joyous comments from the countess, who saw an interventionof Providence in this meeting of the princess and Nicholas."I was never pleased at Bolkonski's engagement to Natasha," said thecountess, "but I always wanted Nicholas to marry the princess, and had apresentiment that it would happen. What a good thing it would be!"Sonya felt that this was true: that the only possibility of retrievingthe Rostovs' affairs was by Nicholas marrying a rich woman, and that theprincess was a good match. It was very bitter for her. But despite hergrief, or perhaps just because of it, she took on herself all thedifficult work of directing the storing and packing of their things andwas busy for whole days. The count and countess turned to her when theyhad any orders to give. Petya and Natasha on the contrary, far fromhelping their parents, were generally a nuisance and a hindrance toeveryone. Almost all day long the house resounded with their runningfeet, their cries, and their spontaneous laughter. They laughed and weregay not because there was any reason to laugh, but because gaiety andmirth were in their hearts and so everything that happened was a causefor gaiety and laughter to them. Petya was in high spirits becausehaving left home a boy he had returned (as everybody told him) a fineyoung man, because he was at home, because he had left Belaya Tserkovwhere there was no hope of soon taking part in a battle and had come toMoscow where there was to be fighting in a few days, and chiefly becauseNatasha, whose lead he always followed, was in high spirits. Natasha wasgay because she had been sad too long and now nothing reminded her ofthe cause of her sadness, and because she was feeling well. She was alsohappy because she had someone to adore her: the adoration of others wasa lubricant the wheels of her machine needed to make them run freely--and Petya adored her. Above all, they were gay because there was a warnear Moscow, there would be fighting at the town gates, arms were beinggiven out, everybody was escaping--going away somewhere, and in generalsomething extraordinary was happening, and that is always exciting,especially to the young.CHAPTER XIIIOn Saturday, the thirty-first of August, everything in the Rostovs'house seemed topsy-turvy. All the doors were open, all the furniture wasbeing carried out or moved about, and the mirrors and pictures had beentaken down. There were trunks in the rooms, and hay, wrapping paper, andropes were scattered about. The peasants and house serfs carrying outthe things were treading heavily on the parquet floors. The yard wascrowded with peasant carts, some loaded high and already corded up,others still empty.The voices and footsteps of the many servants and of the peasants whohad come with the carts resounded as they shouted to one another in theyard and in the house. The count had been out since morning. Thecountess had a headache brought on by all the noise and turmoil and waslying down in the new sitting room with a vinegar compress on her head.Petya was not at home, he had gone to visit a friend with whom he meantto obtain a transfer from the militia to the active army. Sonya was inthe ballroom looking after the packing of the glass and china. Natashawas sitting on the floor of her dismantled room with dresses, ribbons,and scarves strewn all about her, gazing fixedly at the floor andholding in her hands the old ball dress (already out of fashion) whichshe had worn at her first Petersburg ball.Natasha was ashamed of doing nothing when everyone else was so busy, andseveral times that morning had tried to set to work, but her heart wasnot in it, and she could not and did not know how to do anything exceptwith all her heart and all her might. For a while she had stood besideSonya while the china was being packed and tried to help, but soon gaveit up and went to her room to pack her own things. At first she found itamusing to give away dresses and ribbons to the maids, but when that wasdone and what was left had still to be packed, she found it dull."Dunyasha, you pack! You will, won't you, dear?" And when Dunyashawillingly promised to do it all for her, Natasha sat down on the floor,took her old ball dress, and fell into a reverie quite unrelated to whatought to have occupied her thoughts now. She was roused from her reverieby the talk of the maids in the next room (which was theirs) and by thesound of their hurried footsteps going to the back porch. Natasha got upand looked out of the window. An enormously long row of carts full ofwounded men had stopped in the street.The housekeeper, the old nurse, the cooks, coachmen, maids, footmen,postilions, and scullions stood at the gate, staring at the wounded.Natasha, throwing a clean pocket handkerchief over her hair and holdingan end of it in each hand, went out into the street.The former housekeeper, old Mavra Kuzminichna, had stepped out of thecrowd by the gate, gone up to a cart with a hood constructed of bastmats, and was speaking to a pale young officer who lay inside. Natashamoved a few steps forward and stopped shyly, still holding herhandkerchief, and listened to what the housekeeper was saying."Then you have nobody in Moscow?" she was saying. "You would be morecomfortable somewhere in a house... in ours, for instance... the familyare leaving.""I don't know if it would be allowed," replied the officer in a weakvoice. "Here is our commanding officer... ask him," and he pointed to astout major who was walking back along the street past the row of carts.Natasha glanced with frightened eyes at the face of the wounded officerand at once went to meet the major."May the wounded men stay in our house?" she asked.The major raised his hand to his cap with a smile."Which one do you want, Ma'am'selle?" said he, screwing up his eyes andsmiling.Natasha quietly repeated her question, and her face and whole mannerwere so serious, though she was still holding the ends of herhandkerchief, that the major ceased smiling and after some reflection--as if considering in how far the thing was possible--replied in theaffirmative."Oh yes, why not? They may," he said.With a slight inclination of her head, Natasha stepped back quickly toMavra Kuzminichna, who stood talking compassionately to the officer."They may. He says they may!" whispered Natasha.The cart in which the officer lay was turned into the Rostovs' yard, anddozens of carts with wounded men began at the invitation of thetownsfolk to turn into the yards and to draw up at the entrances of thehouses in Povarskaya Street. Natasha was evidently pleased to be dealingwith new people outside the ordinary routine of her life. She and MavraKuzminichna tried to get as many of the wounded as possible into theiryard."Your Papa must be told, though," said Mavra Kuzminichna."Never mind, never mind, what does it matter? For one day we can moveinto the drawing room. They can have all our half of the house.""There now, young lady, you do take things into your head! Even if weput them into the wing, the men's room, or the nurse's room, we must askpermission.""Well, I'll ask."Natasha ran into the house and went on tiptoe through the half-open doorinto the sitting room, where there was a smell of vinegar and Hoffman'sdrops."Are you asleep, Mamma?""Oh, what sleep-?" said the countess, waking up just as she was droppinginto a doze."Mamma darling!" said Natasha, kneeling by her mother and bringing herface close to her mother's, "I am sorry, forgive me, I'll never do itagain; I woke you up! Mavra Kuzminichna has sent me: they have broughtsome wounded here--officers. Will you let them come? They have nowhereto go. I knew you'd let them come!" she said quickly all in one breath."What officers? Whom have they brought? I don't understand anythingabout it," said the countess.Natasha laughed, and the countess too smiled slightly."I knew you'd give permission... so I'll tell them," and, having kissedher mother, Natasha got up and went to the door.In the hall she met her father, who had returned with bad news."We've stayed too long!" said the count with involuntary vexation. "Theclub is closed and the police are leaving.""Papa, is it all right--I've invited some of the wounded into thehouse?" said Natasha."Of course it is," he answered absently. "That's not the point. I begyou not to indulge in trifles now, but to help to pack, and tomorrow wemust go, go, go!...."And the count gave a similar order to the major-domo and the servants.At dinner Petya having returned home told them the news he had heard. Hesaid the people had been getting arms in the Kremlin, and that thoughRostopchin's broadsheet had said that he would sound a call two or threedays in advance, the order had certainly already been given for everyoneto go armed to the Three Hills tomorrow, and that there would be a bigbattle there.The countess looked with timid horror at her son's eager, excited faceas he said this. She realized that if she said a word about his notgoing to the battle (she knew he enjoyed the thought of the impendingengagement) he would say something about men, honor, and the fatherland--something senseless, masculine, and obstinate which there would be nocontradicting, and her plans would be spoiled; and so, hoping to arrangeto leave before then and take Petya with her as their protector anddefender, she did not answer him, but after dinner called the countaside and implored him with tears to take her away quickly, that verynight if possible. With a woman's involuntary loving cunning she, whotill then had not shown any alarm, said that she would die of fright ifthey did not leave that very night. Without any pretense she was nowafraid of everything.CHAPTER XIVMadame Schoss, who had been out to visit her daughter, increased thecountess' fears still more by telling what she had seen at a spiritdealer's in Myasnitski Street. When returning by that street she hadbeen unable to pass because of a drunken crowd rioting in front of theshop. She had taken a cab and driven home by a side street and thecabman had told her that the people were breaking open the barrels atthe drink store, having received orders to do so.After dinner the whole Rostov household set to work with enthusiastichaste packing their belongings and preparing for their departure. Theold count, suddenly setting to work, kept passing from the yard to thehouse and back again, shouting confused instructions to the hurryingpeople, and flurrying them still more. Petya directed things in theyard. Sonya, owing to the count's contradictory orders, lost her headand did not know what to do. The servants ran noisily about the houseand yard, shouting and disputing. Natasha, with the ardor characteristicof all she did suddenly set to work too. At first her intervention inthe business of packing was received skeptically. Everybody expectedsome prank from her and did not wish to obey her; but she resolutely andpassionately demanded obedience, grew angry and nearly cried becausethey did not heed her, and at last succeeded in making them believe her.Her first exploit, which cost her immense effort and established herauthority, was the packing of the carpets. The count had valuableGobelin tapestries and Persian carpets in the house. When Natasha set towork two cases were standing open in the ballroom, one almost full upwith crockery, the other with carpets. There was also much chinastanding on the tables, and still more was being brought in from thestoreroom. A third case was needed and servants had gone to fetch it."Sonya, wait a bit--we'll pack everything into these," said Natasha."You can't, Miss, we have tried to," said the butler's assistant."No, wait a minute, please."And Natasha began rapidly taking out of the case dishes and plateswrapped in paper."The dishes must go in here among the carpets," said she."Why, it's a mercy if we can get the carpets alone into three cases,"said the butler's assistant."Oh, wait, please!" And Natasha began rapidly and deftly sorting out thethings. "These aren't needed," said she, putting aside some plates ofKiev ware. "These--yes, these must go among the carpets," she said,referring to the Saxony china dishes."Don't, Natasha! Leave it alone! We'll get it all packed," urged Sonyareproachfully."What a young lady she is!" remarked the major-domo.But Natasha would not give in. She turned everything out and beganquickly repacking, deciding that the inferior Russian carpets andunnecessary crockery should not be taken at all. When everything hadbeen taken out of the cases, they recommenced packing, and it turned outthat when the cheaper things not worth taking had nearly all beenrejected, the valuable ones really did all go into the two cases. Onlythe lid of the case containing the carpets would not shut down. A fewmore things might have been taken out, but Natasha insisted on havingher own way. She packed, repacked, pressed, made the butler's assistantand Petya--whom she had drawn into the business of packing--press on thelid, and made desperate efforts herself."That's enough, Natasha," said Sonya. "I see you were right, but justtake out the top one.""I won't!" cried Natasha, with one hand holding back the hair that hungover her perspiring face, while with the other she pressed down thecarpets. "Now press, Petya! Press, Vasilich, press hard!" she cried.The carpets yielded and the lid closed; Natasha, clapping her hands,screamed with delight and tears fell from her eyes. But this only lasteda moment. She at once set to work afresh and they now trusted hercompletely. The count was not angry even when they told him that Natashahad countermanded an order of his, and the servants now came to her toask whether a cart was sufficiently loaded, and whether it might becorded up. Thanks to Natasha's directions the work now went onexpeditiously, unnecessary things were left, and the most valuablepacked as compactly as possible.But hard as they all worked till quite late that night, they could notget everything packed. The countess had fallen asleep and the count,having put off their departure till next morning, went to bed.Sonya and Natasha slept in the sitting room without undressing.That night another wounded man was driven down the Povarskaya, and MavraKuzminichna, who was standing at the gate, had him brought into theRostovs' yard. Mavra Kuzminichna concluded that he was a very importantman. He was being conveyed in a caleche with a raised hood, and wasquite covered by an apron. On the box beside the driver sat a venerableold attendant. A doctor and two soldiers followed the carriage in acart."Please come in here. The masters are going away and the whole housewill be empty," said the old woman to the old attendant."Well, perhaps," said he with a sigh. "We don't expect to get him homealive! We have a house of our own in Moscow, but it's a long way fromhere, and there's nobody living in it.""Do us the honor to come in, there's plenty of everything in themaster's house. Come in," said Mavra Kuzminichna. "Is he very ill?" sheasked.The attendant made a hopeless gesture."We don't expect to get him home! We must ask the doctor."And the old servant got down from the box and went up to the cart."All right!" said the doctor.The old servant returned to the caleche, looked into it, shook his headdisconsolately, told the driver to turn into the yard, and stoppedbeside Mavra Kuzminichna."O, Lord Jesus Christ!" she murmured.She invited them to take the wounded man into the house."The masters won't object..." she said.But they had to avoid carrying the man upstairs, and so they took himinto the wing and put him in the room that had been Madame Schoss'.This wounded man was Prince Andrew Bolkonski.CHAPTER XVMoscow's last day had come. It was a clear bright autumn day, a Sunday.The church bells everywhere were ringing for service, just as usual onSundays. Nobody seemed yet to realize what awaited the city.Only two things indicated the social condition of Moscow--the rabble,that is the poor people, and the price of commodities. An enormous crowdof factory hands, house serfs, and peasants, with whom some officials,seminarists, and gentry were mingled, had gone early that morning to theThree Hills. Having waited there for Rostopchin who did not turn up,they became convinced that Moscow would be surrendered, and thendispersed all about the town to the public houses and cookshops. Pricestoo that day indicated the state of affairs. The price of weapons, ofgold, of carts and horses, kept rising, but the value of paper money andcity articles kept falling, so that by midday there were instances ofcarters removing valuable goods, such as cloth, and receiving in paymenta half of what they carted, while peasant horses were fetching fivehundred rubles each, and furniture, mirrors, and bronzes were beinggiven away for nothing.In the Rostovs' staid old-fashioned house the dissolution of formerconditions of life was but little noticeable. As to the serfs the onlyindication was that three out of their huge retinue disappeared duringthe night, but nothing was stolen; and as to the value of theirpossessions, the thirty peasant carts that had come in from theirestates and which many people envied proved to be extremely valuable andthey were offered enormous sums of money for them. Not only were hugesums offered for the horses and carts, but on the previous evening andearly in the morning of the first of September, orderlies and servantssent by wounded officers came to the Rostovs' and wounded men draggedthemselves there from the Rostovs' and from neighboring houses wherethey were accommodated, entreating the servants to try to get them alift out of Moscow. The major-domo to whom these entreaties wereaddressed, though he was sorry for the wounded, resolutely refused,saying that he dare not even mention the matter to the count. Pity thesewounded men as one might, it was evident that if they were given onecart there would be no reason to refuse another, or all the carts andone's own carriages as well. Thirty carts could not save all the woundedand in the general catastrophe one could not disregard oneself and one'sown family. So thought the major-domo on his master's behalf.On waking up that morning Count Ilya Rostov left his bedroom softly, soas not to wake the countess who had fallen asleep only toward morning,and came out to the porch in his lilac silk dressing gown. In the yardstood the carts ready corded. The carriages were at the front porch. Themajor-domo stood at the porch talking to an elderly orderly and to apale young officer with a bandaged arm. On seeing the count the major-domo made a significant and stern gesture to them both to go away."Well, Vasilich, is everything ready?" asked the count, and stroking hisbald head he looked good-naturedly at the officer and the orderly andnodded to them. (He liked to see new faces.)"We can harness at once, your excellency.""Well, that's right. As soon as the countess wakes we'll be off, Godwilling! What is it, gentlemen?" he added, turning to the officer. "Areyou staying in my house?"The officer came nearer and suddenly his face flushed crimson."Count, be so good as to allow me... for God's sake, to get into somecorner of one of your carts! I have nothing here with me.... I shall beall right on a loaded cart..."Before the officer had finished speaking the orderly made the samerequest on behalf of his master."Oh, yes, yes, yes!" said the count hastily. "I shall be very pleased,very pleased. Vasilich, you'll see to it. Just unload one or two carts.Well, what of it... do what's necessary..." said the count, mutteringsome indefinite order.But at the same moment an expression of warm gratitude on the officer'sface had already sealed the order. The count looked around him. In theyard, at the gates, at the window of the wings, wounded officers andtheir orderlies were to be seen. They were all looking at the count andmoving toward the porch."Please step into the gallery, your excellency," said the major-domo."What are your orders about the pictures?"The count went into the house with him, repeating his order not torefuse the wounded who asked for a lift."Well, never mind, some of the things can be unloaded," he added in asoft, confidential voice, as though afraid of being overheard.At nine o'clock the countess woke up, and Matrena Timofeevna, who hadbeen her lady's maid before her marriage and now performed a sort ofchief gendarme's duty for her, came to say that Madame Schoss was muchoffended and the young ladies' summer dresses could not be left behind.On inquiry, the countess learned that Madame Schoss was offended becauseher trunk had been taken down from its cart, and all the loads werebeing uncorded and the luggage taken out of the carts to make room forwounded men whom the count in the simplicity of his heart had orderedthat they should take with them. The countess sent for her husband."What is this, my dear? I hear that the luggage is being unloaded.""You know, love, I wanted to tell you... Countess dear... an officercame to me to ask for a few carts for the wounded. After all, ours arethings that can be bought but think what being left behind means tothem!... Really now, in our own yard--we asked them in ourselves andthere are officers among them.... You know, I think, my dear... let thembe taken... where's the hurry?"The count spoke timidly, as he always did when talking of money matters.The countess was accustomed to this tone as a precursor of news ofsomething detrimental to the children's interests, such as the buildingof a new gallery or conservatory, the inauguration of a private theateror an orchestra. She was accustomed always to oppose anything announcedin that timid tone and considered it her duty to do so.She assumed her dolefully submissive manner and said to her husband:"Listen to me, Count, you have managed matters so that we are gettingnothing for the house, and now you wish to throw away all our--all thechildren's property! You said yourself that we have a hundred thousandrubles' worth of things in the house. I don't consent, my dear, I don't!Do as you please! It's the government's business to look after thewounded; they know that. Look at the Lopukhins opposite, they clearedout everything two days ago. That's what other people do. It's only wewho are such fools. If you have no pity on me, have some for thechildren."Flourishing his arms in despair the count left the room withoutreplying."Papa, what are you doing that for?" asked Natasha, who had followed himinto her mother's room."Nothing! What business is it of yours?" muttered the count angrily."But I heard," said Natasha. "Why does Mamma object?""What business is it of yours?" cried the count.Natasha stepped up to the window and pondered."Papa! Here's Berg coming to see us," said she, looking out of thewindow.CHAPTER XVIBerg, the Rostovs' son-in-law, was already a colonel wearing the ordersof Vladimir and Anna, and he still filled the quiet and agreeable postof assistant to the head of the staff of the assistant commander of thefirst division of the Second Army.On the first of September he had come to Moscow from the army.He had nothing to do in Moscow, but he had noticed that everyone in thearmy was asking for leave to visit Moscow and had something to do there.So he considered it necessary to ask for leave of absence for family anddomestic reasons.Berg drove up to his father-in-law's house in his spruce little trapwith a pair of sleek roans, exactly like those of a certain prince. Helooked attentively at the carts in the yard and while going up to theporch took out a clean pocket handkerchief and tied a knot in it.From the anteroom Berg ran with smooth though impatient steps into thedrawing room, where he embraced the count, kissed the hands of Natashaand Sonya, and hastened to inquire after "Mamma's" health."Health, at a time like this?" said the count. "Come, tell us the news!Is the army retreating or will there be another battle?""God Almighty alone can decide the fate of our fatherland, Papa," saidBerg. "The army is burning with a spirit of heroism and the leaders, soto say, have now assembled in council. No one knows what is coming. Butin general I can tell you, Papa, that such a heroic spirit, the trulyantique valor of the Russian army, which they--which it" (he correctedhimself) "has shown or displayed in the battle of the twenty-sixth--there are no words worthy to do it justice! I tell you, Papa" (he smotehimself on the breast as a general he had heard speaking had done, butBerg did it a trifle late for he should have struck his breast at thewords "Russian army"), "I tell you frankly that we, the commanders, farfrom having to urge the men on or anything of that kind, could hardlyrestrain those... those... yes, those exploits of antique valor," hewent on rapidly. "General Barclay de Tolly risked his life everywhere atthe head of the troops, I can assure you. Our corps was stationed on ahillside. You can imagine!"And Berg related all that he remembered of the various tales he hadheard those days. Natasha watched him with an intent gaze that confusedhim, as if she were trying to find in his face the answer to somequestion."Altogether such heroism as was displayed by the Russian warriors cannotbe imagined or adequately praised!" said Berg, glancing round atNatasha, and as if anxious to conciliate her, replying to her intentlook with a smile. "'Russia is not in Moscow, she lives in the hearts ofher sons!' Isn't it so, Papa?" said he.Just then the countess came in from the sitting room with a weary anddissatisfied expression. Berg hurriedly jumped up, kissed her hand,asked about her health, and, swaying his head from side to side toexpress sympathy, remained standing beside her."Yes, Mamma, I tell you sincerely that these are hard and sad times forevery Russian. But why are you so anxious? You have still time to getaway....""I can't think what the servants are about," said the countess, turningto her husband. "I have just been told that nothing is ready yet.Somebody after all must see to things. One misses Mitenka at such times.There won't be any end to it."The count was about to say something, but evidently restrained himself.He got up from his chair and went to the door.At that moment Berg drew out his handkerchief as if to blow his noseand, seeing the knot in it, pondered, shaking his head sadly andsignificantly."And I have a great favor to ask of you, Papa," said he."Hm..." said the count, and stopped."I was driving past Yusupov's house just now," said Berg with a laugh,"when the steward, a man I know, ran out and asked me whether I wouldn'tbuy something. I went in out of curiosity, you know, and there is asmall chiffonier and a dressing table. You know how dear Vera wanted achiffonier like that and how we had a dispute about it." (At the mentionof the chiffonier and dressing table Berg involuntarily changed his toneto one of pleasure at his admirable domestic arrangements.) "And it'ssuch a beauty! It pulls out and has a secret English drawer, you know!And dear Vera has long wanted one. I wish to give her a surprise, yousee. I saw so many of those peasant carts in your yard. Please let mehave one, I will pay the man well, and..."The count frowned and coughed."Ask the countess, I don't give orders.""If it's inconvenient, please don't," said Berg. "Only I so wanted it,for dear Vera's sake.""Oh, go to the devil, all of you! To the devil, the devil, the devil..."cried the old count. "My head's in a whirl!"And he left the room. The countess began to cry."Yes, Mamma! Yes, these are very hard times!" said Berg.Natasha left the room with her father and, as if finding it difficult toreach some decision, first followed him and then ran downstairs.Petya was in the porch, engaged in giving out weapons to the servantswho were to leave Moscow. The loaded carts were still standing in theyard. Two of them had been uncorded and a wounded officer was climbinginto one of them helped by an orderly."Do you know what it's about?" Petya asked Natasha.She understood that he meant what were their parents quarreling about.She did not answer."It's because Papa wanted to give up all the carts to the wounded," saidPetya. "Vasilich told me. I consider...""I consider," Natasha suddenly almost shouted, turning her angry face toPetya, "I consider it so horrid, so abominable, so... I don't know what.Are we despicable Germans?"Her throat quivered with convulsive sobs and, afraid of weakening andletting the force of her anger run to waste, she turned and rushedheadlong up the stairs.Berg was sitting beside the countess consoling her with the respectfulattention of a relative. The count, pipe in hand, was pacing up and downthe room, when Natasha, her face distorted by anger, burst in like atempest and approached her mother with rapid steps."It's horrid! It's abominable!" she screamed. "You can't possibly haveordered it!"Berg and the countess looked at her, perplexed and frightened. The countstood still at the window and listened."Mamma, it's impossible: see what is going on in the yard!" she cried."They will be left!...""What's the matter with you? Who are 'they'? What do you want?""Why, the wounded! It's impossible, Mamma. It's monstrous!... No, Mammadarling, it's not the thing. Please forgive me, darling.... Mamma, whatdoes it matter what we take away? Only look what is going on in theyard... Mamma!... It's impossible!"The count stood by the window and listened without turning round.Suddenly he sniffed and put his face closer to the window.The countess glanced at her daughter, saw her face full of shame for hermother, saw her agitation, and understood why her husband did not turnto look at her now, and she glanced round quite disconcerted."Oh, do as you like! Am I hindering anyone?" she said, not surrenderingat once."Mamma, darling, forgive me!"But the countess pushed her daughter away and went up to her husband."My dear, you order what is right.... You know I don't understand aboutit," said she, dropping her eyes shamefacedly."The eggs... the eggs are teaching the hen," muttered the count throughtears of joy, and he embraced his wife who was glad to hide her look ofshame on his breast."Papa! Mamma! May I see to it? May I?..." asked Natasha. "We will stilltake all the most necessary things."The count nodded affirmatively, and Natasha, at the rapid pace at whichshe used to run when playing at tag, ran through the ballroom to theanteroom and downstairs into the yard.The servants gathered round Natasha, but could not believe the strangeorder she brought them until the count himself, in his wife's name,confirmed the order to give up all the carts to the wounded and take thetrunks to the storerooms. When they understood that order the servantsset to work at this new task with pleasure and zeal. It no longer seemedstrange to them but on the contrary it seemed the only thing that couldbe done, just as a quarter of an hour before it had not seemed strangeto anyone that the wounded should be left behind and the goods cartedaway but that had seemed the only thing to do.The whole household, as if to atone for not having done it sooner, seteagerly to work at the new task of placing the wounded in the carts. Thewounded dragged themselves out of their rooms and stood with pale buthappy faces round the carts. The news that carts were to be had spreadto the neighboring houses, from which wounded men began to come into theRostovs' yard. Many of the wounded asked them not to unload the cartsbut only to let them sit on the top of the things. But the work ofunloading, once started, could not be arrested. It seemed not to matterwhether all or only half the things were left behind. Cases full ofchina, bronzes, pictures, and mirrors that had been so carefully packedthe night before now lay about the yard, and still they went onsearching for and finding possibilities of unloading this or that andletting the wounded have another and yet another cart."We can take four more men," said the steward. "They can have my trap,or else what is to become of them?""Let them have my wardrobe cart," said the countess. "Dunyasha can gowith me in the carriage."They unloaded the wardrobe cart and sent it to take wounded men from ahouse two doors off. The whole household, servants included, was brightand animated. Natasha was in a state of rapturous excitement such as shehad not known for a long time."What could we fasten this onto?" asked the servants, trying to fix atrunk on the narrow footboard behind a carriage. "We must keep at leastone cart.""What's in it?" asked Natasha."The count's books.""Leave it, Vasilich will put it away. It's not wanted."The phaeton was full of people and there was a doubt as to where CountPeter could sit."On the box. You'll sit on the box, won't you, Petya?" cried Natasha.Sonya too was busy all this time, but the aim of her efforts was quitedifferent from Natasha's. She was putting away the things that had to beleft behind and making a list of them as the countess wished, and shetried to get as much taken away with them as possible.CHAPTER XVIIBefore two o'clock in the afternoon the Rostovs' four carriages, packedfull and with the horses harnessed, stood at the front door. One by onethe carts with the wounded had moved out of the yard.The caleche in which Prince Andrew was being taken attracted Sonya'sattention as it passed the front porch. With the help of a maid she wasarranging a seat for the countess in the huge high coach that stood atthe entrance."Whose caleche is that?" she inquired, leaning out of the carriagewindow."Why, didn't you know, Miss?" replied the maid. "The wounded prince: hespent the night in our house and is going with us.""But who is it? What's his name?""It's our intended that was--Prince Bolkonski himself! They say he isdying," replied the maid with a sigh.Sonya jumped out of the coach and ran to the countess. The countess,tired out and already dressed in shawl and bonnet for her journey, waspacing up and down the drawing room, waiting for the household toassemble for the usual silent prayer with closed doors before starting.Natasha was not in the room."Mamma," said Sonya, "Prince Andrew is here, mortally wounded. He isgoing with us."The countess opened her eyes in dismay and, seizing Sonya's arm, glancedaround."Natasha?" she murmured.At that moment this news had only one significance for both of them.They knew their Natasha, and alarm as to what would happen if she heardthis news stifled all sympathy for the man they both liked."Natasha does not know yet, but he is going with us," said Sonya."You say he is dying?"Sonya nodded.The countess put her arms around Sonya and began to cry."The ways of God are past finding out!" she thought, feeling that theAlmighty Hand, hitherto unseen, was becoming manifest in all that wasnow taking place."Well, Mamma? Everything is ready. What's the matter?" asked Natasha, aswith animated face she ran into the room."Nothing," answered the countess. "If everything is ready let us start."And the countess bent over her reticule to hide her agitated face. Sonyaembraced Natasha and kissed her.Natasha looked at her inquiringly."What is it? What has happened?""Nothing... No...""Is it something very bad for me? What is it?" persisted Natasha withher quick intuition.Sonya sighed and made no reply. The count, Petya, Madame Schoss, MavraKuzminichna, and Vasilich came into the drawing room and, having closedthe doors, they all sat down and remained for some moments silentlyseated without looking at one another.The count was the first to rise, and with a loud sigh crossed himselfbefore the icon. All the others did the same. Then the count embracedMavra Kuzminichna and Vasilich, who were to remain in Moscow, and whilethey caught at his hand and kissed his shoulder he patted their backslightly with some vaguely affectionate and comforting words. Thecountess went into the oratory and there Sonya found her on her kneesbefore the icons that had been left here and there hanging on the wall.(The most precious ones, with which some family tradition was connected,were being taken with them.)In the porch and in the yard the men whom Petya had armed with swordsand daggers, with trousers tucked inside their high boots and with beltsand girdles tightened, were taking leave of those remaining behind.As is always the case at a departure, much had been forgotten or put inthe wrong place, and for a long time two menservants stood one on eachside of the open door and the carriage steps waiting to help thecountess in, while maids rushed with cushions and bundles from the houseto the carriages, the caleche, the phaeton, and back again."They always will forget everything!" said the countess. "Don't you knowI can't sit like that?"And Dunyasha, with clenched teeth, without replying but with anaggrieved look on her face, hastily got into the coach to rearrange theseat."Oh, those servants!" said the count, swaying his head.Efim, the old coachman, who was the only one the countess trusted todrive her, sat perched up high on the box and did not so much as glanceround at what was going on behind him. From thirty years' experience heknew it would be some time yet before the order, "Be off, in God'sname!" would be given him: and he knew that even when it was said hewould be stopped once or twice more while they sent back to fetchsomething that had been forgotten, and even after that he would again bestopped and the countess herself would lean out of the window and beghim for the love of heaven to drive carefully down the hill. He knew allthis and therefore waited calmly for what would happen, with morepatience than the horses, especially the near one, the chestnut Falcon,who was pawing the ground and champing his bit. At last all were seated,the carriage steps were folded and pulled up, the door was shut,somebody was sent for a traveling case, and the countess leaned out andsaid what she had to say. Then Efim deliberately doffed his hat andbegan crossing himself. The postilion and all the other servants did thesame. "Off, in God's name!" said Efim, putting on his hat. "Start!" Thepostilion started the horses, the off pole horse tugged at his collar,the high springs creaked, and the body of the coach swayed. The footmansprang onto the box of the moving coach which jolted as it passed out ofthe yard onto the uneven roadway; the other vehicles jolted in theirturn, and the procession of carriages moved up the street. In thecarriages, the caleche, and the phaeton, all crossed themselves as theypassed the church opposite the house. Those who were to remain in Moscowwalked on either side of the vehicles seeing the travelers off.Rarely had Natasha experienced so joyful a feeling as now, sitting inthe carriage beside the countess and gazing at the slowly receding wallsof forsaken, agitated Moscow. Occasionally she leaned out of thecarriage window and looked back and then forward at the long train ofwounded in front of them. Almost at the head of the line she could seethe raised hood of Prince Andrew's caleche. She did not know who was init, but each time she looked at the procession her eyes sought thatcaleche. She knew it was right in front.In Kudrino, from the Nikitski, Presnya, and Podnovinsk Streets cameseveral other trains of vehicles similar to the Rostovs', and as theypassed along the Sadovaya Street the carriages and carts formed two rowsabreast.As they were going round the Sukharev water tower Natasha, who wasinquisitively and alertly scrutinizing the people driving or walkingpast, suddenly cried out in joyful surprise:"Dear me! Mamma, Sonya, look, it's he!""Who? Who?""Look! Yes, on my word, it's Bezukhov!" said Natasha, putting her headout of the carriage and staring at a tall, stout man in a coachman'slong coat, who from his manner of walking and moving was evidently agentleman in disguise, and who was passing under the arch of theSukharev tower accompanied by a small, sallow-faced, beardless old manin a frieze coat."Yes, it really is Bezukhov in a coachman's coat, with a queer-lookingold boy. Really," said Natasha, "look, look!""No, it's not he. How can you talk such nonsense?""Mamma," screamed Natasha, "I'll stake my head it's he! I assure you!Stop, stop!" she cried to the coachman.But the coachman could not stop, for from the Meshchanski Street camemore carts and carriages, and the Rostovs were being shouted at to moveon and not block the way.In fact, however, though now much farther off than before, the Rostovsall saw Pierre--or someone extraordinarily like him--in a coachman'scoat, going down the street with head bent and a serious face beside asmall, beardless old man who looked like a footman. That old man noticeda face thrust out of the carriage window gazing at them, andrespectfully touching Pierre's elbow said something to him and pointedto the carriage. Pierre, evidently engrossed in thought, could not atfirst understand him. At length when he had understood and looked in thedirection the old man indicated, he recognized Natasha, and followinghis first impulse stepped instantly and rapidly toward the coach. Buthaving taken a dozen steps he seemed to remember something and stopped.Natasha's face, leaning out of the window, beamed with quizzicalkindliness."Peter Kirilovich, come here! We have recognized you! This iswonderful!" she cried, holding out her hand to him. "What are you doing?Why are you like this?"Pierre took her outstretched hand and kissed it awkwardly as he walkedalong beside her while the coach still moved on."What is the matter, Count?" asked the countess in a surprised andcommiserating tone."What? What? Why? Don't ask me," said Pierre, and looked round atNatasha whose radiant, happy expression--of which he was consciouswithout looking at her--filled him with enchantment."Are you remaining in Moscow, then?"Pierre hesitated."In Moscow?" he said in a questioning tone. "Yes, in Moscow. Good-bye!""Ah, if only I were a man? I'd certainly stay with you. How splendid!"said Natasha. "Mamma, if you'll let me, I'll stay!"Pierre glanced absently at Natasha and was about to say something, butthe countess interrupted him."You were at the battle, we heard.""Yes, I was," Pierre answered. "There will be another battletomorrow..." he began, but Natasha interrupted him."But what is the matter with you, Count? You are not like yourself....""Oh, don't ask me, don't ask me! I don't know myself. Tomorrow... Butno! Good-bye, good-by!" he muttered. "It's an awful time!" and droppingbehind the carriage he stepped onto the pavement.Natasha continued to lean out of the window for a long time, beaming athim with her kindly, slightly quizzical, happy smile.CHAPTER XVIIIFor the last two days, ever since leaving home, Pierre had been livingin the empty house of his deceased benefactor, Bazdeev. This is how ithappened.When he woke up on the morning after his return to Moscow and hisinterview with Count Rostopchin, he could not for some time make outwhere he was and what was expected of him. When he was informed thatamong others awaiting him in his reception room there was a Frenchmanwho had brought a letter from his wife, the Countess Helene, he feltsuddenly overcome by that sense of confusion and hopelessness to whichhe was apt to succumb. He felt that everything was now at an end, allwas in confusion and crumbling to pieces, that nobody was right orwrong, the future held nothing, and there was no escape from thisposition. Smiling unnaturally and muttering to himself, he first satdown on the sofa in an attitude of despair, then rose, went to the doorof the reception room and peeped through the crack, returned flourishinghis arms, and took up a book. His major-domo came in a second time tosay that the Frenchman who had brought the letter from the countess wasvery anxious to see him if only for a minute, and that someone fromBazdeev's widow had called to ask Pierre to take charge of her husband'sbooks, as she herself was leaving for the country."Oh, yes, in a minute; wait... or no! No, of course... go and say I willcome directly," Pierre replied to the major-domo.But as soon as the man had left the room Pierre took up his hat whichwas lying on the table and went out of his study by the other door.There was no one in the passage. He went along the whole length of thispassage to the stairs and, frowning and rubbing his forehead with bothhands, went down as far as the first landing. The hall porter wasstanding at the front door. From the landing where Pierre stood therewas a second staircase leading to the back entrance. He went down thatstaircase and out into the yard. No one had seen him. But there weresome carriages waiting, and as soon as Pierre stepped out of the gatethe coachmen and the yard porter noticed him and raised their caps tohim. When he felt he was being looked at he behaved like an ostrichwhich hides its head in a bush in order not to be seen: he hung his headand quickening his pace went down the street.Of all the affairs awaiting Pierre that day the sorting of JosephBazdeev's books and papers appeared to him the most necessary.He hired the first cab he met and told the driver to go to thePatriarch's Ponds, where the widow Bazdeev's house was.Continually turning round to look at the rows of loaded carts that weremaking their way from all sides out of Moscow, and balancing his bulkybody so as not to slip out of the ramshackle old vehicle, Pierre,experiencing the joyful feeling of a boy escaping from school, began totalk to his driver.The man told him that arms were being distributed today at the Kremlinand that tomorrow everyone would be sent out beyond the Three Hillsgates and a great battle would be fought there.Having reached the Patriarch's Ponds Pierre found the Bazdeevs' house,where he had not been for a long time past. He went up to the gate.Gerasim, that sallow beardless old man Pierre had seen at Torzhok fiveyears before with Joseph Bazdeev, came out in answer to his knock."At home?" asked Pierre."Owing to the present state of things Sophia Danilovna has gone to theTorzhok estate with the children, your excellency.""I will come in all the same, I have to look through the books," saidPierre."Be so good as to step in. Makar Alexeevich, the brother of my latemaster--may the kingdom of heaven be his--has remained here, but he isin a weak state as you know," said the old servant.Pierre knew that Makar Alexeevich was Joseph Bazdeev's half-insanebrother and a hard drinker."Yes, yes, I know. Let us go in..." said Pierre and entered the house.A tall, bald-headed old man with a red nose, wearing a dressing gown andwith galoshes on his bare feet, stood in the anteroom. On seeing Pierrehe muttered something angrily and went away along the passage."He was a very clever man but has now grown quite feeble, as your honorsees," said Gerasim. "Will you step into the study?" Pierre nodded. "Asit was sealed up so it has remained, but Sophia Danilovna gave ordersthat if anyone should come from you they were to have the books."Pierre went into that gloomy study which he had entered with suchtrepidation in his benefactor's lifetime. The room, dusty and untouchedsince the death of Joseph Bazdeev was now even gloomier.Gerasim opened one of the shutters and left the room on tiptoe. Pierrewent round the study, approached the cupboard in which the manuscriptswere kept, and took out what had once been one of the most important,the holy of holies of the order. This was the authentic Scotch Acts withBazdeev's notes and explanations. He sat down at the dusty writingtable, and, having laid the manuscripts before him, opened them out,closed them, finally pushed them away, and resting his head on his handsank into meditation.Gerasim looked cautiously into the study several times and saw Pierrealways sitting in the same attitude.More than two hours passed and Gerasim took the liberty of making aslight noise at the door to attract his attention, but Pierre did nothear him."Is the cabman to be discharged, your honor?""Oh yes!" said Pierre, rousing himself and rising hurriedly. "Lookhere," he added, taking Gerasim by a button of his coat and looking downat the old man with moist, shining, and ecstatic eyes, "I say, do youknow that there is going to be a battle tomorrow?""We heard so," replied the man."I beg you not to tell anyone who I am, and to do what I ask you.""Yes, your excellency," replied Gerasim. "Will you have something toeat?""No, but I want something else. I want peasant clothes and a pistol,"said Pierre, unexpectedly blushing."Yes, your excellency," said Gerasim after thinking for a moment.All the rest of that day Pierre spent alone in his benefactor's study,and Gerasim heard him pacing restlessly from one corner to another andtalking to himself. And he spent the night on a bed made up for himthere.Gerasim, being a servant who in his time had seen many strange things,accepted Pierre's taking up his residence in the house without surprise,and seemed pleased to have someone to wait on. That same evening--without even asking himself what they were wanted for--he procured acoachman's coat and cap for Pierre, and promised to get him the pistolnext day. Makar Alexeevich came twice that evening shuffling along inhis galoshes as far as the door and stopped and looked ingratiatingly atPierre. But as soon as Pierre turned toward him he wrapped his dressinggown around him with a shamefaced and angry look and hurried away. Itwas when Pierre (wearing the coachman's coat which Gerasim had procuredfor him and had disinfected by steam) was on his way with the old man tobuy the pistol at the Sukharev market that he met the Rostovs.CHAPTER XIXKutuzov's order to retreat through Moscow to the Ryazan road was issuedat night on the first of September.The first troops started at once, and during the night they marchedslowly and steadily without hurry. At daybreak, however, those nearingthe town at the Dorogomilov bridge saw ahead of them masses of soldierscrowding and hurrying across the bridge, ascending on the opposite sideand blocking the streets and alleys, while endless masses of troops werebearing down on them from behind, and an unreasoning hurry and alarmovercame them. They all rushed forward to the bridge, onto it, and tothe fords and the boats. Kutuzov himself had driven round by sidestreets to the other side of Moscow.By ten o'clock in the morning of the second of September, only the rearguard remained in the Dorogomilov suburb, where they had ample room. Themain army was on the other side of Moscow or beyond it.At that very time, at ten in the morning of the second of September,Napoleon was standing among his troops on the Poklonny Hill looking atthe panorama spread out before him. From the twenty-sixth of August tothe second of September, that is from the battle of Borodino to theentry of the French into Moscow, during the whole of that agitating,memorable week, there had been the extraordinary autumn weather thatalways comes as a surprise, when the sun hangs low and gives more heatthan in spring, when everything shines so brightly in the rare clearatmosphere that the eyes smart, when the lungs are strengthened andrefreshed by inhaling the aromatic autumn air, when even the nights arewarm, and when in those dark warm nights, golden stars startle anddelight us continually by falling from the sky.At ten in the morning of the second of September this weather stillheld.The brightness of the morning was magical. Moscow seen from the PoklonnyHill lay spaciously spread out with her river, her gardens, and herchurches, and she seemed to be living her usual life, her cupolasglittering like stars in the sunlight.The view of the strange city with its peculiar architecture, such as hehad never seen before, filled Napoleon with the rather envious anduneasy curiosity men feel when they see an alien form of life that hasno knowledge of them. This city was evidently living with the full forceof its own life. By the indefinite signs which, even at a distance,distinguish a living body from a dead one, Napoleon from the PoklonnyHill perceived the throb of life in the town and felt, as it were, thebreathing of that great and beautiful body.Every Russian looking at Moscow feels her to be a mother; everyforeigner who sees her, even if ignorant of her significance as themother city, must feel her feminine character, and Napoleon felt it."Cette ville asiatique aux innombrables eglises, Moscou la sainte. Lavoila done enfin, cette fameuse ville! Il etait temps," * said he, anddismounting he ordered a plan of Moscow to be spread out before him, andsummoned Lelorgne d'Ideville, the interpreter.* "That Asiatic city of the innumerable churches, holy Moscow! Here itis then at last, that famous city. It was high time.""A town captured by the enemy is like a maid who has lost her honor,"thought he (he had said so to Tuchkov at Smolensk). From that point ofview he gazed at the Oriental beauty he had not seen before. It seemedstrange to him that his long-felt wish, which had seemed unattainable,had at last been realized. In the clear morning light he gazed now atthe city and now at the plan, considering its details, and the assuranceof possessing it agitated and awed him."But could it be otherwise?" he thought. "Here is this capital at myfeet. Where is Alexander now, and of what is he thinking? A strange,beautiful, and majestic city; and a strange and majestic moment! In whatlight must I appear to them!" thought he, thinking of his troops. "Hereshe is, the reward for all those fainthearted men," he reflected,glancing at those near him and at the troops who were approaching andforming up. "One word from me, one movement of my hand, and that ancientcapital of the Tsars would perish. But my clemency is always ready todescend upon the vanquished. I must be magnanimous and truly great. Butno, it can't be true that I am in Moscow," he suddenly thought. "Yethere she is lying at my feet, with her golden domes and crossesscintillating and twinkling in the sunshine. But I shall spare her. Onthe ancient monuments of barbarism and despotism I will inscribe greatwords of justice and mercy.... It is just this which Alexander will feelmost painfully, I know him." (It seemed to Napoleon that the chiefimport of what was taking place lay in the personal struggle betweenhimself and Alexander.) "From the height of the Kremlin--yes, there isthe Kremlin, yes--I will give them just laws; I will teach them themeaning of true civilization, I will make generations of boyars remembertheir conqueror with love. I will tell the deputation that I did not,and do not, desire war, that I have waged war only against the falsepolicy of their court; that I love and respect Alexander and that inMoscow I will accept terms of peace worthy of myself and of my people. Ido not wish to utilize the fortunes of war to humiliate an honoredmonarch. 'Boyars,' I will say to them, 'I do not desire war, I desirethe peace and welfare of all my subjects.' However, I know theirpresence will inspire me, and I shall speak to them as I always do:clearly, impressively, and majestically. But can it be true that I am inMoscow? Yes, there she lies.""Qu'on m'amene les boyars," * said he to his suite.* "Bring the boyars to me."A general with a brilliant suite galloped off at once to fetch theboyars.Two hours passed. Napoleon had lunched and was again standing in thesame place on the Poklonny Hill awaiting the deputation. His speech tothe boyars had already taken definite shape in his imagination. Thatspeech was full of dignity and greatness as Napoleon understood it.He was himself carried away by the tone of magnanimity he intended toadopt toward Moscow. In his imagination he appointed days for assembliesat the palace of the Tsars, at which Russian notables and his own wouldmingle. He mentally appointed a governor, one who would win the heartsof the people. Having learned that there were many charitableinstitutions in Moscow he mentally decided that he would shower favorson them all. He thought that, as in Africa he had to put on a burnooseand sit in a mosque, so in Moscow he must be beneficent like the Tsars.And in order finally to touch the hearts of the Russians--and being likeall Frenchmen unable to imagine anything sentimental without a referenceto ma chere, ma tendre, ma pauvre mere * --he decided that he wouldplace an inscription on all these establishments in large letters: "Thisestablishment is dedicated to my dear mother." Or no, it should besimply: Maison de ma Mere, *(2) he concluded. "But am I really inMoscow? Yes, here it lies before me, but why is the deputation from thecity so long in appearing?" he wondered.* "My dear, my tender, my poor mother."* (2) "House of my Mother."Meanwhile an agitated consultation was being carried on in whispersamong his generals and marshals at the rear of his suite. Those sent tofetch the deputation had returned with the news that Moscow was empty,that everyone had left it. The faces of those who were not conferringtogether were pale and perturbed. They were not alarmed by the fact thatMoscow had been abandoned by its inhabitants (grave as that factseemed), but by the question how to tell the Emperor--without puttinghim in the terrible position of appearing ridiculous--that he had beenawaiting the boyars so long in vain: that there were drunken mobs leftin Moscow but no one else. Some said that a deputation of some sort mustbe scraped together, others disputed that opinion and maintained thatthe Emperor should first be carefully and skillfully prepared, and thentold the truth."He will have to be told, all the same," said some gentlemen of thesuite. "But, gentlemen..."The position was the more awkward because the Emperor, meditating uponhis magnanimous plans, was pacing patiently up and down before theoutspread map, occasionally glancing along the road to Moscow from underhis lifted hand with a bright and proud smile."But it's impossible..." declared the gentlemen of the suite, shruggingtheir shoulders but not venturing to utter the implied word--leridicule...At last the Emperor, tired of futile expectation, his actor's instinctsuggesting to him that the sublime moment having been too long drawn outwas beginning to lose its sublimity, gave a sign with his hand. A singlereport of a signaling gun followed, and the troops, who were alreadyspread out on different sides of Moscow, moved into the city throughTver, Kaluga, and Dorogomilov gates. Faster and faster, vying with oneanother, they moved at the double or at a trot, vanishing amid theclouds of dust they raised and making the air ring with a deafening roarof mingling shouts.Drawn on by the movement of his troops Napoleon rode with them as far asthe Dorogomilov gate, but there again stopped and, dismounting from hishorse, paced for a long time by the Kammer-Kollezski rampart, awaitingthe deputation.CHAPTER XXMeanwhile Moscow was empty. There were still people in it, perhaps afiftieth part of its former inhabitants had remained, but it was empty.It was empty in the sense that a dying queenless hive is empty.In a queenless hive no life is left though to a superficial glance itseems as much alive as other hives.The bees circle round a queenless hive in the hot beams of the middaysun as gaily as around the living hives; from a distance it smells ofhoney like the others, and bees fly in and out in the same way. But onehas only to observe that hive to realize that there is no longer anylife in it. The bees do not fly in the same way, the smell and the soundthat meet the beekeeper are not the same. To the beekeeper's tap on thewall of the sick hive, instead of the former instant unanimous hummingof tens of thousands of bees with their abdomens threateninglycompressed, and producing by the rapid vibration of their wings anaerial living sound, the only reply is a disconnected buzzing fromdifferent parts of the deserted hive. From the alighting board, insteadof the former spirituous fragrant smell of honey and venom, and the warmwhiffs of crowded life, comes an odor of emptiness and decay minglingwith the smell of honey. There are no longer sentinels sounding thealarm with their abdomens raised, and ready to die in defense of thehive. There is no longer the measured quiet sound of throbbing activity,like the sound of boiling water, but diverse discordant sounds ofdisorder. In and out of the hive long black robber bees smeared withhoney fly timidly and shiftily. They do not sting, but crawl away fromdanger. Formerly only bees laden with honey flew into the hive, and theyflew out empty; now they fly out laden. The beekeeper opens the lowerpart of the hive and peers in. Instead of black, glossy bees--tamed bytoil, clinging to one another's legs and drawing out the wax, with aceaseless hum of labor--that used to hang in long clusters down to thefloor of the hive, drowsy shriveled bees crawl about separately invarious directions on the floor and walls of the hive. Instead of aneatly glued floor, swept by the bees with the fanning of their wings,there is a floor littered with bits of wax, excrement, dying beesscarcely moving their legs, and dead ones that have not been clearedaway.The beekeeper opens the upper part of the hive and examines the super.Instead of serried rows of bees sealing up every gap in the combs andkeeping the brood warm, he sees the skillful complex structures of thecombs, but no longer in their former state of purity. All is neglectedand foul. Black robber bees are swiftly and stealthily prowling aboutthe combs, and the short home bees, shriveled and listless as if theywere old, creep slowly about without trying to hinder the robbers,having lost all motive and all sense of life. Drones, bumblebees, wasps,and butterflies knock awkwardly against the walls of the hive in theirflight. Here and there among the cells containing dead brood and honeyan angry buzzing can sometimes be heard. Here and there a couple ofbees, by force of habit and custom cleaning out the brood cells, withefforts beyond their strength laboriously drag away a dead bee orbumblebee without knowing why they do it. In another corner two old beesare languidly fighting, or cleaning themselves, or feeding one another,without themselves knowing whether they do it with friendly or hostileintent. In a third place a crowd of bees, crushing one another, attacksome victim and fight and smother it, and the victim, enfeebled orkilled, drops from above slowly and lightly as a feather, among the heapof corpses. The keeper opens the two center partitions to examine thebrood cells. In place of the former close dark circles formed bythousands of bees sitting back to back and guarding the high mystery ofgeneration, he sees hundreds of dull, listless, and sleepy shells ofbees. They have almost all died unawares, sitting in the sanctuary theyhad guarded and which is now no more. They reek of decay and death. Onlya few of them still move, rise, and feebly fly to settle on the enemy'shand, lacking the spirit to die stinging him; the rest are dead and fallas lightly as fish scales. The beekeeper closes the hive, chalks a markon it, and when he has time tears out its contents and burns it clean.So in the same way Moscow was empty when Napoleon, weary, uneasy, andmorose, paced up and down in front of the Kammer-Kollezski rampart,awaiting what to his mind was a necessary, if but formal, observance ofthe proprieties--a deputation.In various corners of Moscow there still remained a few people aimlesslymoving about, following their old habits and hardly aware of what theywere doing.When with due circumspection Napoleon was informed that Moscow wasempty, he looked angrily at his informant, turned away, and silentlycontinued to walk to and fro."My carriage!" he said.He took his seat beside the aide-de-camp on duty and drove into thesuburb. "Moscow deserted!" he said to himself. "What an incredibleevent!"He did not drive into the town, but put up at an inn in the Dorogomilovsuburb.The coup de theatre had not come off.CHAPTER XXIThe Russian troops were passing through Moscow from two o'clock at nighttill two in the afternoon and bore away with them the wounded and thelast of the inhabitants who were leaving.The greatest crush during the movement of the troops took place at theStone, Moskva, and Yauza bridges.While the troops, dividing into two parts when passing around theKremlin, were thronging the Moskva and the Stone bridges, a great manysoldiers, taking advantage of the stoppage and congestion, turned backfrom the bridges and slipped stealthily and silently past the church ofVasili the Beatified and under the Borovitski gate, back up the hill tothe Red Square where some instinct told them they could easily takethings not belonging to them. Crowds of the kind seen at cheap salesfilled all the passages and alleys of the Bazaar. But there were nodealers with voices of ingratiating affability inviting customers toenter; there were no hawkers, nor the usual motley crowd of femalepurchasers--but only soldiers, in uniforms and overcoats though withoutmuskets, entering the Bazaar empty-handed and silently making their wayout through its passages with bundles. Tradesmen and their assistants(of whom there were but few) moved about among the soldiers quitebewildered. They unlocked their shops and locked them up again, andthemselves carried goods away with the help of their assistants. On thesquare in front of the Bazaar were drummers beating the muster call. Butthe roll of the drums did not make the looting soldiers run in thedirection of the drum as formerly, but made them, on the contrary, runfarther away. Among the soldiers in the shops and passages some men wereto be seen in gray coats, with closely shaven heads. Two officers, onewith a scarf over his uniform and mounted on a lean, dark-gray horse,the other in an overcoat and on foot, stood at the corner of IlyinkaStreet, talking. A third officer galloped up to them."The general orders them all to be driven out at once, without fail.This is outrageous! Half the men have dispersed.""Where are you off to?... Where?..." he shouted to three infantrymenwithout muskets who, holding up the skirts of their overcoats, wereslipping past him into the Bazaar passage. "Stop, you rascals!""But how are you going to stop them?" replied another officer. "There isno getting them together. The army should push on before the rest bolt,that's all!""How can one push on? They are stuck there, wedged on the bridge, anddon't move. Shouldn't we put a cordon round to prevent the rest fromrunning away?""Come, go in there and drive them out!" shouted the senior officer.The officer in the scarf dismounted, called up a drummer, and went withhim into the arcade. Some soldiers started running away in a group. Ashopkeeper with red pimples on his cheeks near the nose, and a calm,persistent, calculating expression on his plump face, hurriedly andostentatiously approached the officer, swinging his arms."Your honor!" said he. "Be so good as to protect us! We won't grudgetrifles, you are welcome to anything--we shall be delighted! Pray!...I'll fetch a piece of cloth at once for such an honorable gentleman, oreven two pieces with pleasure. For we feel how it is; but what's allthis--sheer robbery! If you please, could not guards be placed if onlyto let us close the shop...."Several shopkeepers crowded round the officer."Eh, what twaddle!" said one of them, a thin, stern-looking man. "Whenone's head is gone one doesn't weep for one's hair! Take what any of youlike!" And flourishing his arm energetically he turned sideways to theofficer."It's all very well for you, Ivan Sidorych, to talk," said the firsttradesman angrily. "Please step inside, your honor!""Talk indeed!" cried the thin one. "In my three shops here I have ahundred thousand rubles' worth of goods. Can they be saved when the armyhas gone? Eh, what people! 'Against God's might our hands can't fight.'""Come inside, your honor!" repeated the tradesman, bowing.The officer stood perplexed and his face showed indecision."It's not my business!" he exclaimed, and strode on quickly down one ofthe passages.From one open shop came the sound of blows and vituperation, and just asthe officer came up to it a man in a gray coat with a shaven head wasflung out violently.This man, bent double, rushed past the tradesman and the officer. Theofficer pounced on the soldiers who were in the shops, but at thatmoment fearful screams reached them from the huge crowd on the Moskvabridge and the officer ran out into the square."What is it? What is it?" he asked, but his comrade was alreadygalloping off past Vasili the Beatified in the direction from which thescreams came.The officer mounted his horse and rode after him. When he reached thebridge he saw two unlimbered guns, the infantry crossing the bridge,several overturned carts, and frightened and laughing faces among thetroops. Beside the cannon a cart was standing to which two horses wereharnessed. Four borzois with collars were pressing close to the wheels.The cart was loaded high, and at the very top, beside a child's chairwith its legs in the air, sat a peasant woman uttering piercing anddesperate shrieks. He was told by his fellow officers that the screamsof the crowd and the shrieks of the woman were due to the fact thatGeneral Ermolov, coming up to the crowd and learning that soldiers weredispersing among the shops while crowds of civilians blocked the bridge,had ordered two guns to be unlimbered and made a show of firing at thebridge. The crowd, crushing one another, upsetting carts, and shoutingand squeezing desperately, had cleared off the bridge and the troopswere now moving forward.CHAPTER XXIIMeanwhile, the city itself was deserted. There was hardly anyone in thestreets. The gates and shops were all closed, only here and there roundthe taverns solitary shouts or drunken songs could be heard. Nobodydrove through the streets and footsteps were rarely heard. ThePovarskaya was quite still and deserted. The huge courtyard of theRostovs' house was littered with wisps of hay and with dung from thehorses, and not a soul was to be seen there. In the great drawing roomof the house, which had been left with all it contained, were twopeople. They were the yard porter Ignat, and the page boy Mishka,Vasilich's grandson who had stayed in Moscow with his grandfather.Mishka had opened the clavichord and was strumming on it with onefinger. The yard porter, his arms akimbo, stood smiling withsatisfaction before the large mirror."Isn't it fine, eh, Uncle Ignat?" said the boy, suddenly beginning tostrike the keyboard with both hands."Only fancy!" answered Ignat, surprised at the broadening grin on hisface in the mirror."Impudence! Impudence!" they heard behind them the voice of MavraKuzminichna who had entered silently. "How he's grinning, the fat mug!Is that what you're here for? Nothing's cleared away down there andVasilich is worn out. Just you wait a bit!"Ignat left off smiling, adjusted his belt, and went out of the room withmeekly downcast eyes."Aunt, I did it gently," said the boy."I'll give you something gently, you monkey you!" cried MavraKuzminichna, raising her arm threateningly. "Go and get the samovar toboil for your grandfather."Mavra Kuzminichna flicked the dust off the clavichord and closed it, andwith a deep sigh left the drawing room and locked its main door.Going out into the yard she paused to consider where she should go next--to drink tea in the servants' wing with Vasilich, or into the storeroomto put away what still lay about.She heard the sound of quick footsteps in the quiet street. Someonestopped at the gate, and the latch rattled as someone tried to open it.Mavra Kuzminichna went to the gate."Who do you want?""The count--Count Ilya Andreevich Rostov.""And who are you?""An officer, I have to see him," came the reply in a pleasant, well-bredRussian voice.Mavra Kuzminichna opened the gate and an officer of eighteen, with theround face of a Rostov, entered the yard."They have gone away, sir. Went away yesterday at vespertime," saidMavra Kuzminichna cordially.The young officer standing in the gateway, as if hesitating whether toenter or not, clicked his tongue."Ah, how annoying!" he muttered. "I should have come yesterday.... Ah,what a pity."Meanwhile, Mavra Kuzminichna was attentively and sympatheticallyexamining the familiar Rostov features of the young man's face, histattered coat and trodden-down boots."What did you want to see the count for?" she asked."Oh well... it can't be helped!" said he in a tone of vexation andplaced his hand on the gate as if to leave.He again paused in indecision."You see," he suddenly said, "I am a kinsman of the count's and he hasbeen very kind to me. As you see" (he glanced with an amused air andgood-natured smile at his coat and boots) "my things are worn out and Ihave no money, so I was going to ask the count..."Mavra Kuzminichna did not let him finish."Just wait a minute, sir. One little moment," said she.And as soon as the officer let go of the gate handle she turned and,hurrying away on her old legs, went through the back yard to theservants' quarters.While Mavra Kuzminichna was running to her room the officer walked aboutthe yard gazing at his worn-out boots with lowered head and a faintsmile on his lips. "What a pity I've missed Uncle! What a nice oldwoman! Where has she run off to? And how am I to find the nearest way toovertake my regiment, which must by now be getting near the Rogozhskigate?" thought he. Just then Mavra Kuzminichna appeared from behind thecorner of the house with a frightened yet resolute look, carrying arolled-up check kerchief in her hand. While still a few steps from theofficer she unfolded the kerchief and took out of it a white twenty-five-ruble assignat and hastily handed it to him."If his excellency had been at home, as a kinsman he would of course...but as it is..."Mavra Kuzminichna grew abashed and confused. The officer did notdecline, but took the note quietly and thanked her."If the count had been at home..." Mavra Kuzminichna went onapologetically. "Christ be with you, sir! May God preserve you!" saidshe, bowing as she saw him out.Swaying his head and smiling as if amused at himself, the officer ranalmost at a trot through the deserted streets toward the Yauza bridge toovertake his regiment.But Mavra Kuzminichna stood at the closed gate for some time with moisteyes, pensively swaying her head and feeling an unexpected flow ofmotherly tenderness and pity for the unknown young officer.CHAPTER XXIIIFrom an unfinished house on the Varvarka, the ground floor of which wasa dramshop, came drunken shouts and songs. On benches round the tablesin a dirty little room sat some ten factory hands. Tipsy and perspiring,with dim eyes and wide-open mouths, they were all laboriously singingsome song or other. They were singing discordantly, arduously, and withgreat effort, evidently not because they wished to sing, but becausethey wanted to show they were drunk and on a spree. One, a tall, fair-haired lad in a clean blue coat, was standing over the others. His facewith its fine straight nose would have been handsome had it not been forhis thin, compressed, twitching lips and dull, gloomy, fixed eyes.Evidently possessed by some idea, he stood over those who were singing,and solemnly and jerkily flourished above their heads his white arm withthe sleeve turned up to the elbow, trying unnaturally to spread out hisdirty fingers. The sleeve of his coat kept slipping down and he alwayscarefully rolled it up again with his left hand, as if it were mostimportant that the sinewy white arm he was flourishing should be bare.In the midst of the song cries were heard, and fighting and blows in thepassage and porch. The tall lad waved his arm."Stop it!" he exclaimed peremptorily. "There's a fight, lads!" And,still rolling up his sleeve, he went out to the porch.The factory hands followed him. These men, who under the leadership ofthe tall lad were drinking in the dramshop that morning, had brought thepublican some skins from the factory and for this had had drink servedthem. The blacksmiths from a neighboring smithy, hearing the sounds ofrevelry in the tavern and supposing it to have been broken into, wishedto force their way in too and a fight in the porch had resulted.The publican was fighting one of the smiths at the door, and when theworkmen came out the smith, wrenching himself free from the tavernkeeper, fell face downward on the pavement.Another smith tried to enter the doorway, pressing against the publicanwith his chest.The lad with the turned-up sleeve gave the smith a blow in the face andcried wildly: "They're fighting us, lads!"At that moment the first smith got up and, scratching his bruised faceto make it bleed, shouted in a tearful voice: "Police! Murder!...They've killed a man, lads!""Oh, gracious me, a man beaten to death--killed!..." screamed a womancoming out of a gate close by.A crowd gathered round the bloodstained smith."Haven't you robbed people enough--taking their last shirts?" said avoice addressing the publican. "What have you killed a man for, youthief?"The tall lad, standing in the porch, turned his bleared eyes from thepublican to the smith and back again as if considering whom he ought tofight now."Murderer!" he shouted suddenly to the publican. "Bind him, lads!""I daresay you would like to bind me!" shouted the publican, pushingaway the men advancing on him, and snatching his cap from his head heflung it on the ground.As if this action had some mysterious and menacing significance, theworkmen surrounding the publican paused in indecision."I know the law very well, mates! I'll take the matter to the captain ofpolice. You think I won't get to him? Robbery is not permitted toanybody now a days!" shouted the publican, picking up his cap."Come along then! Come along then!" the publican and the tall youngfellow repeated one after the other, and they moved up the streettogether.The bloodstained smith went beside them. The factory hands and othersfollowed behind, talking and shouting.At the corner of the Moroseyka, opposite a large house with closedshutters and bearing a bootmaker's signboard, stood a score of thin,worn-out, gloomy-faced bootmakers, wearing overalls and long tatteredcoats."He should pay folks off properly," a thin workingman, with frowningbrows and a straggly beard, was saying."But he's sucked our blood and now he thinks he's quit of us. He's beenmisleading us all the week and now that he's brought us to this passhe's made off."On seeing the crowd and the bloodstained man the workman ceasedspeaking, and with eager curiosity all the bootmakers joined the movingcrowd."Where are all the folks going?""Why, to the police, of course!""I say, is it true that we have been beaten?" "And what did you think?Look what folks are saying."Questions and answers were heard. The publican, taking advantage of theincreased crowd, dropped behind and returned to his tavern.The tall youth, not noticing the disappearance of his foe, waved hisbare arm and went on talking incessantly, attracting general attentionto himself. It was around him that the people chiefly crowded, expectinganswers from him to the questions that occupied all their minds."He must keep order, keep the law, that's what the government is therefor. Am I not right, good Christians?" said the tall youth, with ascarcely perceptible smile. "He thinks there's no government! How canone do without government? Or else there would be plenty who'd rob us.""Why talk nonsense?" rejoined voices in the crowd. "Will they give upMoscow like this? They told you that for fun, and you believed it!Aren't there plenty of troops on the march? Let him in, indeed! That'swhat the government is for. You'd better listen to what people aresaying," said some of the mob pointing to the tall youth.By the wall of China-Town a smaller group of people were gathered rounda man in a frieze coat who held a paper in his hand."An ukase, they are reading an ukase! Reading an ukase!" cried voices inthe crowd, and the people rushed toward the reader.The man in the frieze coat was reading the broadsheet of August 31. Whenthe crowd collected round him he seemed confused, but at the demand ofthe tall lad who had pushed his way up to him, he began in a rathertremulous voice to read the sheet from the beginning."Early tomorrow I shall go to his Serene Highness," he read ("SirinHighness," said the tall fellow with a triumphant smile on his lips anda frown on his brow), "to consult with him to act, and to aid the armyto exterminate these scoundrels. We too will take part..." the readerwent on, and then paused ("Do you see," shouted the youth victoriously,"he's going to clear up the whole affair for you...."), "in destroyingthem, and will send these visitors to the devil. I will come back todinner, and we'll set to work. We will do, completely do, and undo thesescoundrels."The last words were read out in the midst of complete silence. The talllad hung his head gloomily. It was evident that no one had understoodthe last part. In particular, the words "I will come back to dinner,"evidently displeased both reader and audience. The people's minds weretuned to a high pitch and this was too simple and needlesslycomprehensible--it was what any one of them might have said andtherefore was what an ukase emanating from the highest authority shouldnot say.They all stood despondent and silent. The tall youth moved his lips andswayed from side to side."We should ask him... that's he himself?"... "Yes, ask him indeed!...Why not? He'll explain"... voices in the rear of the crowd were suddenlyheard saying, and the general attention turned to the policesuperintendent's trap which drove into the square attended by twomounted dragoons.The superintendent of police, who had gone that morning by CountRostopchin's orders to burn the barges and had in connection with thatmatter acquired a large sum of money which was at that moment in hispocket, on seeing a crowd bearing down upon him told his coachman tostop."What people are these?" he shouted to the men, who were moving singlyand timidly in the direction of his trap."What people are these?" he shouted again, receiving no answer."Your honor..." replied the shopman in the frieze coat, "your honor, inaccord with the proclamation of his highest excellency the count, theydesire to serve, not sparing their lives, and it is not any kind ofriot, but as his highest excellence said...""The count has not left, he is here, and an order will be issuedconcerning you," said the superintendent of police. "Go on!" he orderedhis coachman.The crowd halted, pressing around those who had heard what thesuperintendent had said, and looking at the departing trap.The superintendent of police turned round at that moment with a scaredlook, said something to his coachman, and his horses increased theirspeed."It's a fraud, lads! Lead the way to him, himself!" shouted the tallyouth. "Don't let him go, lads! Let him answer us! Keep him!" shouteddifferent people and the people dashed in pursuit of the trap.Following the superintendent of police and talking loudly the crowd wentin the direction of the Lubyanka Street."There now, the gentry and merchants have gone away and left us toperish. Do they think we're dogs?" voices in the crowd were heard sayingmore and more frequently.CHAPTER XXIVOn the evening of the first of September, after his interview withKutuzov, Count Rostopchin had returned to Moscow mortified and offendedbecause he had not been invited to attend the council of war, andbecause Kutuzov had paid no attention to his offer to take part in thedefense of the city; amazed also at the novel outlook revealed to him atthe camp, which treated the tranquillity of the capital and itspatriotic fervor as not merely secondary but quite irrelevant andunimportant matters. Distressed, offended, and surprised by all this,Rostopchin had returned to Moscow. After supper he lay down on a sofawithout undressing, and was awakened soon after midnight by a courierbringing him a letter from Kutuzov. This letter requested the count tosend police officers to guide the troops through the town, as the armywas retreating to the Ryazan road beyond Moscow. This was not news toRostopchin. He had known that Moscow would be abandoned not merely sincehis interview the previous day with Kutuzov on the Poklonny Hill butever since the battle of Borodino, for all the generals who came toMoscow after that battle had said unanimously that it was impossible tofight another battle, and since then the government property had beenremoved every night, and half the inhabitants had left the city withRostopchin's own permission. Yet all the same this informationastonished and irritated the count, coming as it did in the form of asimple note with an order from Kutuzov, and received at night, breakingin on his beauty sleep.When later on in his memoirs Count Rostopchin explained his actions atthis time, he repeatedly says that he was then actuated by two importantconsiderations: to maintain tranquillity in Moscow and expedite thedeparture of the inhabitants. If one accepts this twofold aim allRostopchin's actions appear irreproachable. "Why were the holy relics,the arms, ammunition, gunpowder, and stores of corn not removed? Whywere thousands of inhabitants deceived into believing that Moscow wouldnot be given up--and thereby ruined?" "To preserve the tranquillity ofthe city," explains Count Rostopchin. "Why were bundles of uselesspapers from the government offices, and Leppich's balloon and otherarticles removed?" "To leave the town empty," explains Count Rostopchin.One need only admit that public tranquillity is in danger and any actionfinds a justification.All the horrors of the reign of terror were based only on solicitude forpublic tranquillity.On what, then, was Count Rostopchin's fear for the tranquillity ofMoscow based in 1812? What reason was there for assuming any probabilityof an uprising in the city? The inhabitants were leaving it and theretreating troops were filling it. Why should that cause the masses toriot?Neither in Moscow nor anywhere in Russia did anything resembling aninsurrection ever occur when the enemy entered a town. More than tenthousand people were still in Moscow on the first and second ofSeptember, and except for a mob in the governor's courtyard, assembledthere at his bidding, nothing happened. It is obvious that there wouldhave been even less reason to expect a disturbance among the people ifafter the battle of Borodino, when the surrender of Moscow becamecertain or at least probable, Rostopchin instead of exciting the peopleby distributing arms and broadsheets had taken steps to remove all theholy relics, the gunpowder, munitions, and money, and had told thepopulation plainly that the town would be abandoned.Rostopchin, though he had patriotic sentiments, was a sanguine andimpulsive man who had always moved in the highest administrative circlesand had no understanding at all of the people he supposed himself to beguiding. Ever since the enemy's entry into Smolensk he had inimagination been playing the role of director of the popular feeling of"the heart of Russia." Not only did it seem to him (as to alladministrators) that he controlled the external actions of Moscow'sinhabitants, but he also thought he controlled their mental attitude bymeans of his broadsheets and posters, written in a coarse tone which thepeople despise in their own class and do not understand from those inauthority. Rostopchin was so pleased with the fine role of leader ofpopular feeling, and had grown so used to it, that the necessity ofrelinquishing that role and abandoning Moscow without any heroic displaytook him unawares and he suddenly felt the ground slip away from underhis feet, so that he positively did not know what to do. Though he knewit was coming, he did not till the last moment wholeheartedly believethat Moscow would be abandoned, and did not prepare for it. Theinhabitants left against his wishes. If the government offices wereremoved, this was only done on the demand of officials to whom the countyielded reluctantly. He was absorbed in the role he had created forhimself. As is often the case with those gifted with an ardentimagination, though he had long known that Moscow would be abandoned heknew it only with his intellect, he did not believe it in his heart anddid not adapt himself mentally to this new position of affairs.All his painstaking and energetic activity (in how far it was useful andhad any effect on the people is another question) had been simplydirected toward arousing in the masses his own feeling of patriotichatred of the French.But when events assumed their true historical character, when expressinghatred for the French in words proved insufficient, when it was not evenpossible to express that hatred by fighting a battle, when self-confidence was of no avail in relation to the one question beforeMoscow, when the whole population streamed out of Moscow as one man,abandoning their belongings and proving by that negative action all thedepth of their national feeling, then the role chosen by Rostopchinsuddenly appeared senseless. He unexpectedly felt himself ridiculous,weak, and alone, with no ground to stand on.When, awakened from his sleep, he received that cold, peremptory notefrom Kutuzov, he felt the more irritated the more he felt himself toblame. All that he had been specially put in charge of, the stateproperty which he should have removed, was still in Moscow and it was nolonger possible to take the whole of it away."Who is to blame for it? Who has let things come to such a pass?" heruminated. "Not I, of course. I had everything ready. I had Moscowfirmly in hand. And this is what they have let it come to! Villains!Traitors!" he thought, without clearly defining who the villains andtraitors were, but feeling it necessary to hate those traitors whoeverthey might be who were to blame for the false and ridiculous position inwhich he found himself.All that night Count Rostopchin issued orders, for which people came tohim from all parts of Moscow. Those about him had never seen the countso morose and irritable."Your excellency, the Director of the Registrar's Department has sentfor instructions... From the Consistory, from the Senate, from theUniversity, from the Foundling Hospital, the Suffragan has sent...asking for information.... What are your orders about the Fire Brigade?From the governor of the prison... from the superintendent of thelunatic asylum..." All night long such announcements were continuallybeing received by the count.To all these inquiries he gave brief and angry replies indicating thatorders from him were not now needed, that the whole affair, carefullyprepared by him, had now been ruined by somebody, and that that somebodywould have to bear the whole responsibility for all that might happen."Oh, tell that blockhead," he said in reply to the question from theRegistrar's Department, "that he should remain to guard his documents.Now why are you asking silly questions about the Fire Brigade? They havehorses, let them be off to Vladimir, and not leave them to the French.""Your excellency, the superintendent of the lunatic asylum has come:what are your commands?""My commands? Let them go away, that's all.... And let the lunatics outinto the town. When lunatics command our armies God evidently meansthese other madmen to be free."In reply to an inquiry about the convicts in the prison, CountRostopchin shouted angrily at the governor:"Do you expect me to give you two battalions--which we have not got--fora convoy? Release them, that's all about it!""Your excellency, there are some political prisoners, Meshkov,Vereshchagin...""Vereshchagin! Hasn't he been hanged yet?" shouted Rostopchin. "Bringhim to me!"CHAPTER XXVToward nine o'clock in the morning, when the troops were already movingthrough Moscow, nobody came to the count any more for instructions.Those who were able to get away were going of their own accord, thosewho remained behind decided for themselves what they must do.The count ordered his carriage that he might drive to Sokolniki, and satin his study with folded hands, morose, sallow, and taciturn.In quiet and untroubled times it seems to every administrator that it isonly by his efforts that the whole population under his rule is keptgoing, and in this consciousness of being indispensable everyadministrator finds the chief reward of his labor and efforts. While thesea of history remains calm the ruler-administrator in his frail bark,holding on with a boat hook to the ship of the people and himselfmoving, naturally imagines that his efforts move the ship he is holdingon to. But as soon as a storm arises and the sea begins to heave and theship to move, such a delusion is no longer possible. The ship movesindependently with its own enormous motion, the boat hook no longerreaches the moving vessel, and suddenly the administrator, instead ofappearing a ruler and a source of power, becomes an insignificant,useless, feeble man.Rostopchin felt this, and it was this which exasperated him.The superintendent of police, whom the crowd had stopped, went in to seehim at the same time as an adjutant who informed the count that thehorses were harnessed. They were both pale, and the superintendent ofpolice, after reporting that he had executed the instructions he hadreceived, informed the count that an immense crowd had collected in thecourtyard and wished to see him.Without saying a word Rostopchin rose and walked hastily to his light,luxurious drawing room, went to the balcony door, took hold of thehandle, let it go again, and went to the window from which he had abetter view of the whole crowd. The tall lad was standing in front,flourishing his arm and saying something with a stern look. The blood-stained smith stood beside him with a gloomy face. A drone of voices wasaudible through the closed window."Is my carriage ready?" asked Rostopchin, stepping back from the window."It is, your excellency," replied the adjutant.Rostopchin went again to the balcony door."But what do they want?" he asked the superintendent of police."Your excellency, they say they have got ready, according to yourorders, to go against the French, and they shouted something abouttreachery. But it is a turbulent crowd, your excellency--I hardlymanaged to get away from it. Your excellency, I venture to suggest...""You may go. I don't need you to tell me what to do!" exclaimedRostopchin angrily.He stood by the balcony door looking at the crowd."This is what they have done with Russia! This is what they have donewith me!" thought he, full of an irrepressible fury that welled upwithin him against the someone to whom what was happening might beattributed. As often happens with passionate people, he was mastered byanger but was still seeking an object on which to vent it. "Here is thatmob, the dregs of the people," he thought as he gazed at the crowd:"this rabble they have roused by their folly! They want a victim," hethought as he looked at the tall lad flourishing his arm. And thisthought occurred to him just because he himself desired a victim,something on which to vent his rage."Is the carriage ready?" he asked again."Yes, your excellency. What are your orders about Vereshchagin? He iswaiting at the porch," said the adjutant."Ah!" exclaimed Rostopchin, as if struck by an unexpected recollection.And rapidly opening the door he went resolutely out onto the balcony.The talking instantly ceased, hats and caps were doffed, and all eyeswere raised to the count."Good morning, lads!" said the count briskly and loudly. "Thank you forcoming. I'll come out to you in a moment, but we must first settle withthe villain. We must punish the villain who has caused the ruin ofMoscow. Wait for me!"And the count stepped as briskly back into the room and slammed the doorbehind him.A murmur of approbation and satisfaction ran through the crowd. "He'llsettle with all the villains, you'll see! And you said the French...He'll show you what law is!" the mob were saying as if reproving oneanother for their lack of confidence.A few minutes later an officer came hurriedly out of the front door,gave an order, and the dragoons formed up in line. The crowd movedeagerly from the balcony toward the porch. Rostopchin, coming out therewith quick angry steps, looked hastily around as if seeking someone."Where is he?" he inquired. And as he spoke he saw a young man cominground the corner of the house between two dragoons. He had a long thinneck, and his head, that had been half shaved, was again covered byshort hair. This young man was dressed in a threadbare blue cloth coatlined with fox fur, that had once been smart, and dirty hempen convicttrousers, over which were pulled his thin, dirty, trodden-down boots. Onhis thin, weak legs were heavy chains which hampered his irresolutemovements."Ah!" said Rostopchin, hurriedly turning away his eyes from the youngman in the fur-lined coat and pointing to the bottom step of the porch."Put him there."The young man in his clattering chains stepped clumsily to the spotindicated, holding away with one finger the coat collar which chafed hisneck, turned his long neck twice this way and that, sighed, andsubmissively folded before him his thin hands, unused to work.For several seconds while the young man was taking his place on the stepthe silence continued. Only among the back rows of the people, who wereall pressing toward the one spot, could sighs, groans, and the shufflingof feet be heard.While waiting for the young man to take his place on the step Rostopchinstood frowning and rubbing his face with his hand."Lads!" said he, with a metallic ring in his voice. "This man,Vereshchagin, is the scoundrel by whose doing Moscow is perishing."The young man in the fur-lined coat, stooping a little, stood in asubmissive attitude, his fingers clasped before him. His emaciated youngface, disfigured by the half-shaven head, hung down hopelessly. At thecount's first words he raised it slowly and looked up at him as ifwishing to say something or at least to meet his eye. But Rostopchin didnot look at him. A vein in the young man's long thin neck swelled like acord and went blue behind the ear, and suddenly his face flushed.All eyes were fixed on him. He looked at the crowd, and rendered morehopeful by the expression he read on the faces there, he smiled sadlyand timidly, and lowering his head shifted his feet on the step."He has betrayed his Tsar and his country, he has gone over toBonaparte. He alone of all the Russians has disgraced the Russian name,he has caused Moscow to perish," said Rostopchin in a sharp, even voice,but suddenly he glanced down at Vereshchagin who continued to stand inthe same submissive attitude. As if inflamed by the sight, he raised hisarm and addressed the people, almost shouting:"Deal with him as you think fit! I hand him over to you."The crowd remained silent and only pressed closer and closer to oneanother. To keep one another back, to breathe in that stiflingatmosphere, to be unable to stir, and to await something unknown,uncomprehended, and terrible, was becoming unbearable. Those standing infront, who had seen and heard what had taken place before them, allstood with wide-open eyes and mouths, straining with all their strength,and held back the crowd that was pushing behind them."Beat him!... Let the traitor perish and not disgrace the Russian name!"shouted Rostopchin. "Cut him down. I command it."Hearing not so much the words as the angry tone of Rostopchin's voice,the crowd moaned and heaved forward, but again paused."Count!" exclaimed the timid yet theatrical voice of Vereshchagin in themidst of the momentary silence that ensued, "Count! One God is above usboth...." He lifted his head and again the thick vein in his thin neckfilled with blood and the color rapidly came and went in his face.He did not finish what he wished to say."Cut him down! I command it..." shouted Rostopchin, suddenly growingpale like Vereshchagin."Draw sabers!" cried the dragoon officer, drawing his own.Another still stronger wave flowed through the crowd and reaching thefront ranks carried it swaying to the very steps of the porch. The tallyouth, with a stony look on his face, and rigid and uplifted arm, stoodbeside Vereshchagin."Saber him!" the dragoon officer almost whispered.And one of the soldiers, his face all at once distorted with fury,struck Vereshchagin on the head with the blunt side of his saber."Ah!" cried Vereshchagin in meek surprise, looking round with afrightened glance as if not understanding why this was done to him. Asimilar moan of surprise and horror ran through the crowd. "O Lord!"exclaimed a sorrowful voice.But after the exclamation of surprise that had escaped from Vereshchaginhe uttered a plaintive cry of pain, and that cry was fatal. The barrierof human feeling, strained to the utmost, that had held the crowd incheck suddenly broke. The crime had begun and must now be completed. Theplaintive moan of reproach was drowned by the threatening and angry roarof the crowd. Like the seventh and last wave that shatters a ship, thatlast irresistible wave burst from the rear and reached the front ranks,carrying them off their feet and engulfing them all. The dragoon wasabout to repeat his blow. Vereshchagin with a cry of horror, coveringhis head with his hands, rushed toward the crowd. The tall youth,against whom he stumbled, seized his thin neck with his hands and,yelling wildly, fell with him under the feet of the pressing, strugglingcrowd.Some beat and tore at Vereshchagin, others at the tall youth. And thescreams of those that were being trampled on and of those who tried torescue the tall lad only increased the fury of the crowd. It was a longtime before the dragoons could extricate the bleeding youth, beatenalmost to death. And for a long time, despite the feverish haste withwhich the mob tried to end the work that had been begun, those who werehitting, throttling, and tearing at Vereshchagin were unable to killhim, for the crowd pressed from all sides, swaying as one mass with themin the center and rendering it impossible for them either to kill him orlet him go."Hit him with an ax, eh!... Crushed?... Traitor, he sold Christ....Still alive... tenacious... serves him right! Torture serves a thiefright. Use the hatchet!... What--still alive?"Only when the victim ceased to struggle and his cries changed to a long-drawn, measured death rattle did the crowd around his prostrate,bleeding corpse begin rapidly to change places. Each one came up,glanced at what had been done, and with horror, reproach, andastonishment pushed back again."O Lord! The people are like wild beasts! How could he be alive?" voicesin the crowd could be heard saying. "Quite a young fellow too... musthave been a merchant's son. What men!... and they say he's not the rightone.... How not the right one?... O Lord! And there's another has beenbeaten too--they say he's nearly done for.... Oh, the people... Aren'tthey afraid of sinning?..." said the same mob now, looking with paineddistress at the dead body with its long, thin, half-severed neck and itslivid face stained with blood and dust.A painstaking police officer, considering the presence of a corpse inhis excellency's courtyard unseemly, told the dragoons to take it away.Two dragoons took it by its distorted legs and dragged it along theground. The gory, dust-stained, half-shaven head with its long necktrailed twisting along the ground. The crowd shrank back from it.At the moment when Vereshchagin fell and the crowd closed in with savageyells and swayed about him, Rostopchin suddenly turned pale and, insteadof going to the back entrance where his carriage awaited him, went withhurried steps and bent head, not knowing where and why, along thepassage leading to the rooms on the ground floor. The count's face waswhite and he could not control the feverish twitching of his lower jaw."This way, your excellency... Where are you going?... This way,please..." said a trembling, frightened voice behind him.Count Rostopchin was unable to reply and, turning obediently, went inthe direction indicated. At the back entrance stood his caleche. Thedistant roar of the yelling crowd was audible even there. He hastilytook his seat and told the coachman to drive him to his country house inSokolniki.When they reached the Myasnitski Street and could no longer hear theshouts of the mob, the count began to repent. He remembered withdissatisfaction the agitation and fear he had betrayed before hissubordinates. "The mob is terrible--disgusting," he said to himself inFrench. "They are like wolves whom nothing but flesh can appease.""Count! One God is above us both!"--Vereshchagin's words suddenlyrecurred to him, and a disagreeable shiver ran down his back. But thiswas only a momentary feeling and Count Rostopchin smiled disdainfully athimself. "I had other duties," thought he. "The people had to beappeased. Many other victims have perished and are perishing for thepublic good"--and he began thinking of his social duties to his familyand to the city entrusted to him, and of himself--not himself asTheodore Vasilyevich Rostopchin (he fancied that Theodore VasilyevichRostopchin was sacrificing himself for the public good) but himself asgovernor, the representative of authority and of the Tsar. "Had I beensimply Theodore Vasilyevich my course of action would have been quitedifferent, but it was my duty to safeguard my life and dignity ascommander-in-chief."Lightly swaying on the flexible springs of his carriage and no longerhearing the terrible sounds of the crowd, Rostopchin grew physicallycalm and, as always happens, as soon as he became physically tranquilhis mind devised reasons why he should be mentally tranquil too. Thethought which tranquillized Rostopchin was not a new one. Since theworld began and men have killed one another no one has ever committedsuch a crime against his fellow man without comforting himself with thissame idea. This idea is le bien public, the hypothetical welfare ofother people.To a man not swayed by passion that welfare is never certain, but he whocommits such a crime always knows just where that welfare lies. AndRostopchin now knew it.Not only did his reason not reproach him for what he had done, but heeven found cause for self-satisfaction in having so successfullycontrived to avail himself of a convenient opportunity to punish acriminal and at the same time pacify the mob."Vereshchagin was tried and condemned to death," thought Rostopchin(though the Senate had only condemned Vereshchagin to hard labor), "hewas a traitor and a spy. I could not let him go unpunished and so I havekilled two birds with one stone: to appease the mob I gave them a victimand at the same time punished a miscreant."Having reached his country house and begun to give orders about domesticarrangements, the count grew quite tranquil.Half an hour later he was driving with his fast horses across theSokolniki field, no longer thinking of what had occurred but consideringwhat was to come. He was driving to the Yauza bridge where he had heardthat Kutuzov was. Count Rostopchin was mentally preparing the angry andstinging reproaches he meant to address to Kutuzov for his deception. Hewould make that foxy old courtier feel that the responsibility for allthe calamities that would follow the abandonment of the city and theruin of Russia (as Rostopchin regarded it) would fall upon his dotingold head. Planning beforehand what he would say to Kutuzov, Rostopchinturned angrily in his caleche and gazed sternly from side to side.The Sokolniki field was deserted. Only at the end of it, in front of thealmshouse and the lunatic asylum, could be seen some people in white andothers like them walking singly across the field shouting andgesticulating.One of these was running to cross the path of Count Rostopchin'scarriage, and the count himself, his coachman, and his dragoons lookedwith vague horror and curiosity at these released lunatics andespecially at the one running toward them.Swaying from side to side on his long, thin legs in his flutteringdressing gown, this lunatic was running impetuously, his gaze fixed onRostopchin, shouting something in a hoarse voice and making signs to himto stop. The lunatic's solemn, gloomy face was thin and yellow, with itsbeard growing in uneven tufts. His black, agate pupils with saffron-yellow whites moved restlessly near the lower eyelids."Stop! Pull up, I tell you!" he cried in a piercing voice, and againshouted something breathlessly with emphatic intonations and gestures.Coming abreast of the caleche he ran beside it."Thrice have they slain me, thrice have I risen from the dead. Theystoned me, crucified me... I shall rise... shall rise... shall rise.They have torn my body. The kingdom of God will be overthrown... Thricewill I overthrow it and thrice re-establish it!" he cried, raising hisvoice higher and higher.Count Rostopchin suddenly grew pale as he had done when the crowd closedin on Vereshchagin. He turned away. "Go fas... faster!" he cried in atrembling voice to his coachman. The caleche flew over the ground asfast as the horses could draw it, but for a long time Count Rostopchinstill heard the insane despairing screams growing fainter in thedistance, while his eyes saw nothing but the astonished, frightened,bloodstained face of "the traitor" in the fur-lined coat.Recent as that mental picture was, Rostopchin already felt that it hadcut deep into his heart and drawn blood. Even now he felt clearly thatthe gory trace of that recollection would not pass with time, but thatthe terrible memory would, on the contrary, dwell in his heart ever morecruelly and painfully to the end of his life. He seemed still to hearthe sound of his own words: "Cut him down! I command it....""Why did I utter those words? It was by some accident I said them.... Ineed not have said them," he thought. "And then nothing would havehappened." He saw the frightened and then infuriated face of the dragoonwho dealt the blow, the look of silent, timid reproach that boy in thefur-lined coat had turned upon him. "But I did not do it for my ownsake. I was bound to act that way.... The mob, the traitor... the publicwelfare," thought he.Troops were still crowding at the Yauza bridge. It was hot. Kutuzov,dejected and frowning, sat on a bench by the bridge toying with his whipin the sand when a caleche dashed up noisily. A man in a general'suniform with plumes in his hat went up to Kutuzov and said something inFrench. It was Count Rostopchin. He told Kutuzov that he had comebecause Moscow, the capital, was no more and only the army remained."Things would have been different if your Serene Highness had not toldme that you would not abandon Moscow without another battle; all thiswould not have happened," he said.Kutuzov looked at Rostopchin as if, not grasping what was said to him,he was trying to read something peculiar written at that moment on theface of the man addressing him. Rostopchin grew confused and becamesilent. Kutuzov slightly shook his head and not taking his penetratinggaze from Rostopchin's face muttered softly:"No! I shall not give up Moscow without a battle!"Whether Kutuzov was thinking of something entirely different when hespoke those words, or uttered them purposely, knowing them to bemeaningless, at any rate Rostopchin made no reply and hastily left him.And strange to say, the Governor of Moscow, the proud Count Rostopchin,took up a Cossack whip and went to the bridge where he began with shoutsto drive on the carts that blocked the way.CHAPTER XXVIToward four o'clock in the afternoon Murat's troops were enteringMoscow. In front rode a detachment of Wurttemberg hussars and behindthem rode the King of Naples himself accompanied by a numerous suite.About the middle of the Arbat Street, near the Church of the MiraculousIcon of St. Nicholas, Murat halted to await news from the advanceddetachment as to the condition in which they had found the citadel, leKremlin.Around Murat gathered a group of those who had remained in Moscow. Theyall stared in timid bewilderment at the strange, long-haired commanderdressed up in feathers and gold."Is that their Tsar himself? He's not bad!" low voices could be heardsaying.An interpreter rode up to the group."Take off your cap... your caps!" These words went from one to anotherin the crowd. The interpreter addressed an old porter and asked if itwas far to the Kremlin. The porter, listening in perplexity to theunfamiliar Polish accent and not realizing that the interpreter wasspeaking Russian, did not understand what was being said to him andslipped behind the others.Murat approached the interpreter and told him to ask where the Russianarmy was. One of the Russians understood what was asked and severalvoices at once began answering the interpreter. A French officer,returning from the advanced detachment, rode up to Murat and reportedthat the gates of the citadel had been barricaded and that there wasprobably an ambuscade there."Good!" said Murat and, turning to one of the gentlemen in his suite,ordered four light guns to be moved forward to fire at the gates.The guns emerged at a trot from the column following Murat and advancedup the Arbat. When they reached the end of the Vozdvizhenka Street theyhalted and drew in the Square. Several French officers superintended theplacing of the guns and looked at the Kremlin through field glasses.The bells in the Kremlin were ringing for vespers, and this soundtroubled the French. They imagined it to be a call to arms. A fewinfantrymen ran to the Kutafyev Gate. Beams and wooden screens had beenput there, and two musket shots rang out from under the gate as soon asan officer and men began to run toward it. A general who was standing bythe guns shouted some words of command to the officer, and the latterran back again with his men.The sound of three more shots came from the gate.One shot struck a French soldier's foot, and from behind the screenscame the strange sound of a few voices shouting. Instantly as at a wordof command the expression of cheerful serenity on the faces of theFrench general, officers, and men changed to one of determinedconcentrated readiness for strife and suffering. To all of them from themarshal to the least soldier, that place was not the Vozdvizhenka,Mokhavaya, or Kutafyev Street, nor the Troitsa Gate (places familiar inMoscow), but a new battlefield which would probably prove sanguinary.And all made ready for that battle. The cries from the gates ceased. Theguns were advanced, the artillerymen blew the ash off their linstocks,and an officer gave the word "Fire!" This was followed by two whistlingsounds of canister shot, one after another. The shot rattled against thestone of the gate and upon the wooden beams and screens, and twowavering clouds of smoke rose over the Square.A few instants after the echo of the reports resounding over the stone-built Kremlin had died away the French heard a strange sound above theirhead. Thousands of crows rose above the walls and circled in the air,cawing and noisily flapping their wings. Together with that sound came asolitary human cry from the gateway and amid the smoke appeared thefigure of a bareheaded man in a peasant's coat. He grasped a musket andtook aim at the French. "Fire!" repeated the officer once more, and thereports of a musket and of two cannon shots were heard simultaneously.The gate was again hidden by smoke.Nothing more stirred behind the screens and the French infantry soldiersand officers advanced to the gate. In the gateway lay three wounded andfour dead. Two men in peasant coats ran away at the foot of the wall,toward the Znamenka."Clear that away!" said the officer, pointing to the beams and thecorpses, and the French soldiers, after dispatching the wounded, threwthe corpses over the parapet.Who these men were nobody knew. "Clear that away!" was all that was saidof them, and they were thrown over the parapet and removed later on thatthey might not stink. Thiers alone dedicates a few eloquent lines totheir memory: "These wretches had occupied the sacred citadel, havingsupplied themselves with guns from the arsenal, and fired" (thewretches) "at the French. Some of them were sabered and the Kremlin waspurged of their presence."Murat was informed that the way had been cleared. The French entered thegates and began pitching their camp in the Senate Square. Out of thewindows of the Senate House the soldiers threw chairs into the Squarefor fuel and kindled fires there.Other detachments passed through the Kremlin and encamped along theMoroseyka, the Lubyanka, and Pokrovka Streets. Others quarteredthemselves along the Vozdvizhenka, the Nikolski, and the TverskoyStreets. No masters of the houses being found anywhere, the French werenot billeted on the inhabitants as is usual in towns but lived in it asin a camp.Though tattered, hungry, worn out, and reduced to a third of theiroriginal number, the French entered Moscow in good marching order. Itwas a weary and famished, but still a fighting and menacing army. But itremained an army only until its soldiers had dispersed into theirdifferent lodgings. As soon as the men of the various regiments began todisperse among the wealthy and deserted houses, the army was lostforever and there came into being something nondescript, neithercitizens nor soldiers but what are known as marauders. When five weekslater these same men left Moscow, they no longer formed an army. Theywere a mob of marauders, each carrying a quantity of articles whichseemed to him valuable or useful. The aim of each man when he leftMoscow was no longer, as it had been, to conquer, but merely to keepwhat he had acquired. Like a monkey which puts its paw into the narrowneck of a jug, and having seized a handful of nuts will not open itsfist for fear of losing what it holds, and therefore perishes, theFrench when they left Moscow had inevitably to perish because theycarried their loot with them, yet to abandon what they had stolen was asimpossible for them as it is for the monkey to open its paw and let goof its nuts. Ten minutes after each regiment had entered a Moscowdistrict, not a soldier or officer was left. Men in military uniformsand Hessian boots could be seen through the windows, laughing andwalking through the rooms. In cellars and storerooms similar men werebusy among the provisions, and in the yards unlocking or breaking opencoach house and stable doors, lighting fires in kitchens and kneadingand baking bread with rolled-up sleeves, and cooking; or frightening,amusing, or caressing women and children. There were many such men bothin the shops and houses--but there was no army.Order after order was issued by the French commanders that dayforbidding the men to disperse about the town, sternly forbidding anyviolence to the inhabitants or any looting, and announcing a roll callfor that very evening. But despite all these measures the men, who hadtill then constituted an army, flowed all over the wealthy, desertedcity with its comforts and plentiful supplies. As a hungry herd ofcattle keeps well together when crossing a barren field, but gets out ofhand and at once disperses uncontrollably as soon as it reaches richpastures, so did the army disperse all over the wealthy city.No residents were left in Moscow, and the soldiers--like waterpercolating through sand--spread irresistibly through the city in alldirections from the Kremlin into which they had first marched. Thecavalry, on entering a merchant's house that had been abandoned andfinding there stabling more than sufficient for their horses, went on,all the same, to the next house which seemed to them better. Many ofthem appropriated several houses, chalked their names on them, andquarreled and even fought with other companies for them. Before they hadhad time to secure quarters the soldiers ran out into the streets to seethe city and, hearing that everything had been abandoned, rushed toplaces where valuables were to be had for the taking. The officersfollowed to check the soldiers and were involuntarily drawn into doingthe same. In Carriage Row carriages had been left in the shops, andgenerals flocked there to select caleches and coaches for themselves.The few inhabitants who had remained invited commanding officers totheir houses, hoping thereby to secure themselves from being plundered.There were masses of wealth and there seemed no end to it. All aroundthe quarters occupied by the French were other regions still unexploredand unoccupied where, they thought, yet greater riches might be found.And Moscow engulfed the army ever deeper and deeper. When water isspilled on dry ground both the dry ground and the water disappear andmud results; and in the same way the entry of the famished army into therich and deserted city resulted in fires and looting and the destructionof both the army and the wealthy city.The French attributed the Fire of Moscow au patriotisme feroce deRostopchine, * the Russians to the barbarity of the French. In reality,however, it was not, and could not be, possible to explain the burningof Moscow by making any individual, or any group of people, responsiblefor it. Moscow was burned because it found itself in a position in whichany town built of wood was bound to burn, quite apart from whether ithad, or had not, a hundred and thirty inferior fire engines. DesertedMoscow had to burn as inevitably as a heap of shavings has to burn onwhich sparks continually fall for several days. A town built of wood,where scarcely a day passes without conflagrations when the house ownersare in residence and a police force is present, cannot help burning whenits inhabitants have left it and it is occupied by soldiers who smokepipes, make campfires of the Senate chairs in the Senate Square, andcook themselves meals twice a day. In peacetime it is only necessary tobillet troops in the villages of any district and the number of fires inthat district immediately increases. How much then must the probabilityof fire be increased in an abandoned, wooden town where foreign troopsare quartered. "Le patriotisme feroce de Rostopchine" and the barbarityof the French were not to blame in the matter. Moscow was set on fire bythe soldiers' pipes, kitchens, and campfires, and by the carelessness ofenemy soldiers occupying houses they did not own. Even if there was anyarson (which is very doubtful, for no one had any reason to burn thehouses--in any case a troublesome and dangerous thing to do), arsoncannot be regarded as the cause, for the same thing would have happenedwithout any incendiarism.* To Rostopchin's ferocious patriotism.However tempting it might be for the French to blame Rostopchin'sferocity and for Russians to blame the scoundrel Bonaparte, or later onto place an heroic torch in the hands of their own people, it isimpossible not to see that there could be no such direct cause of thefire, for Moscow had to burn as every village, factory, or house mustburn which is left by its owners and in which strangers are allowed tolive and cook their porridge. Moscow was burned by its inhabitants, itis true, but by those who had abandoned it and not by those who remainedin it. Moscow when occupied by the enemy did not remain intact likeBerlin, Vienna, and other towns, simply because its inhabitantsabandoned it and did not welcome the French with bread and salt, norbring them the keys of the city.CHAPTER XXVIIThe absorption of the French by Moscow, radiating starwise as it did,only reached the quarter where Pierre was staying by the evening of thesecond of September.After the last two days spent in solitude and unusual circumstances,Pierre was in a state bordering on insanity. He was completely obsessedby one persistent thought. He did not know how or when this thought hadtaken such possession of him, but he remembered nothing of the past,understood nothing of the present, and all he saw and heard appeared tohim like a dream.He had left home only to escape the intricate tangle of life's demandsthat enmeshed him, and which in his present condition he was unable tounravel. He had gone to Joseph Alexeevich's house, on the plea ofsorting the deceased's books and papers, only in search of rest fromlife's turmoil, for in his mind the memory of Joseph Alexeevich wasconnected with a world of eternal, solemn, and calm thoughts, quitecontrary to the restless confusion into which he felt himself beingdrawn. He sought a quiet refuge, and in Joseph Alexeevich's study hereally found it. When he sat with his elbows on the dusty writing tablein the deathlike stillness of the study, calm and significant memoriesof the last few days rose one after another in his imagination,particularly of the battle of Borodino and of that vague sense of hisown insignificance and insincerity compared with the truth, simplicity,and strength of the class of men he mentally classed as they. WhenGerasim roused him from his reverie the idea occurred to him of takingpart in the popular defense of Moscow which he knew was projected. Andwith that object he had asked Gerasim to get him a peasant's coat and apistol, confiding to him his intentions of remaining in JosephAlexeevich's house and keeping his name secret. Then during the firstday spent in inaction and solitude (he tried several times to fix hisattention on the masonic manuscripts, but was unable to do so) the ideathat had previously occurred to him of the cabalistic significance ofhis name in connection with Bonaparte's more than once vaguely presenteditself. But the idea that he, L'russe Besuhof, was destined to set alimit to the power of the Beast was as yet only one of the fancies thatoften passed through his mind and left no trace behind.When, having bought the coat merely with the object of taking part amongthe people in the defense of Moscow, Pierre had met the Rostovs andNatasha had said to him: "Are you remaining in Moscow?... How splendid!"the thought flashed into his mind that it really would be a good thing,even if Moscow were taken, for him to remain there and do what he waspredestined to do.Next day, with the sole idea of not sparing himself and not lagging inany way behind them, Pierre went to the Three Hills gate. But when hereturned to the house convinced that Moscow would not be defended, hesuddenly felt that what before had seemed to him merely a possibilityhad now become absolutely necessary and inevitable. He must remain inMoscow, concealing his name, and must meet Napoleon and kill him, andeither perish or put an end to the misery of all Europe--which it seemedto him was solely due to Napoleon.Pierre knew all the details of the attempt on Bonaparte's life in 1809by a German student in Vienna, and knew that the student had been shot.And the risk to which he would expose his life by carrying out hisdesign excited him still more.Two equally strong feelings drew Pierre irresistibly to this purpose.The first was a feeling of the necessity of sacrifice and suffering inview of the common calamity, the same feeling that had caused him to goto Mozhaysk on the twenty-fifth and to make his way to the very thick ofthe battle and had now caused him to run away from his home and, inplace of the luxury and comfort to which he was accustomed, to sleep ona hard sofa without undressing and eat the same food as Gerasim. Theother was that vague and quite Russian feeling of contempt foreverything conventional, artificial, and human--for everything themajority of men regard as the greatest good in the world. Pierre hadfirst experienced this strange and fascinating feeling at the SlobodaPalace, when he had suddenly felt that wealth, power, and life--all thatmen so painstakingly acquire and guard--if it has any worth has so onlyby reason of the joy with which it can all be renounced.It was the feeling that induces a volunteer recruit to spend his lastpenny on drink, and a drunken man to smash mirrors or glasses for noapparent reason and knowing that it will cost him all the money hepossesses: the feeling which causes a man to perform actions which froman ordinary point of view are insane, to test, as it were, his personalpower and strength, affirming the existence of a higher, nonhumancriterion of life.From the very day Pierre had experienced this feeling for the first timeat the Sloboda Palace he had been continuously under its influence, butonly now found full satisfaction for it. Moreover, at this moment Pierrewas supported in his design and prevented from renouncing it by what hehad already done in that direction. If he were now to leave Moscow likeeveryone else, his flight from home, the peasant coat, the pistol, andhis announcement to the Rostovs that he would remain in Moscow would allbecome not merely meaningless but contemptible and ridiculous, and tothis Pierre was very sensitive.Pierre's physical condition, as is always the case, corresponded to hismental state. The unaccustomed coarse food, the vodka he drank duringthose days, the absence of wine and cigars, his dirty unchanged linen,two almost sleepless nights passed on a short sofa without bedding--allthis kept him in a state of excitement bordering on insanity.It was two o'clock in the afternoon. The French had already enteredMoscow. Pierre knew this, but instead of acting he only thought abouthis undertaking, going over its minutest details in his mind. In hisfancy he did not clearly picture to himself either the striking of theblow or the death of Napoleon, but with extraordinary vividness andmelancholy enjoyment imagined his own destruction and heroic endurance."Yes, alone, for the sake of all, I must do it or perish!" he thought."Yes, I will approach... and then suddenly... with pistol or dagger? Butthat is all the same! 'It is not I but the hand of Providence thatpunishes thee,' I shall say," thought he, imagining what he would saywhen killing Napoleon. "Well then, take me and execute me!" he went on,speaking to himself and bowing his head with a sad but firm expression.While Pierre, standing in the middle of the room, was talking to himselfin this way, the study door opened and on the threshold appeared thefigure of Makar Alexeevich, always so timid before but now quitetransformed.His dressing gown was unfastened, his face red and distorted. He wasobviously drunk. On seeing Pierre he grew confused at first, butnoticing embarrassment on Pierre's face immediately grew bold and,staggering on his thin legs, advanced into the middle of the room."They're frightened," he said confidentially in a hoarse voice. "I say Iwon't surrender, I say... Am I not right, sir?"He paused and then suddenly seeing the pistol on the table seized itwith unexpected rapidity and ran out into the corridor.Gerasim and the porter, who had followed Makar Alexeevich, stopped himin the vestibule and tried to take the pistol from him. Pierre, comingout into the corridor, looked with pity and repulsion at the half-crazyold man. Makar Alexeevich, frowning with exertion, held on to the pistoland screamed hoarsely, evidently with some heroic fancy in his head."To arms! Board them! No, you shan't get it," he yelled."That will do, please, that will do. Have the goodness--please, sir, tolet go! Please, sir..." pleaded Gerasim, trying carefully to steer MakarAlexeevich by the elbows back to the door."Who are you? Bonaparte!..." shouted Makar Alexeevich."That's not right, sir. Come to your room, please, and rest. Allow me tohave the pistol.""Be off, thou base slave! Touch me not! See this?" shouted MakarAlexeevich, brandishing the pistol. "Board them!""Catch hold!" whispered Gerasim to the porter.They seized Makar Alexeevich by the arms and dragged him to the door.The vestibule was filled with the discordant sounds of a struggle and ofa tipsy, hoarse voice.Suddenly a fresh sound, a piercing feminine scream, reverberated fromthe porch and the cook came running into the vestibule."It's them! Gracious heavens! O Lord, four of them, horsemen!" shecried.Gerasim and the porter let Makar Alexeevich go, and in the now silentcorridor the sound of several hands knocking at the front door could beheard.CHAPTER XXVIIIPierre, having decided that until he had carried out his design he woulddisclose neither his identity nor his knowledge of French, stood at thehalf-open door of the corridor, intending to conceal himself as soon asthe French entered. But the French entered and still Pierre did notretire--an irresistible curiosity kept him there.There were two of them. One was an officer--a tall, soldierly, handsomeman--the other evidently a private or an orderly, sunburned, short, andthin, with sunken cheeks and a dull expression. The officer walked infront, leaning on a stick and slightly limping. When he had advanced afew steps he stopped, having apparently decided that these were goodquarters, turned round to the soldiers standing at the entrance, and ina loud voice of command ordered them to put up the horses. Having donethat, the officer, lifting his elbow with a smart gesture, stroked hismustache and lightly touched his hat."Bonjour, la compagnie!" * said he gaily, smiling and looking about him.* "Good day, everybody!"No one gave any reply."Vous etes le bourgeois?" * the officer asked Gerasim.* "Are you the master here?"Gerasim gazed at the officer with an alarmed and inquiring look."Quartier, quartier, logement!" said the officer, looking down at thelittle man with a condescending and good-natured smile. "Les francaissont de bons enfants. Que diable! Voyons! Ne nous fachons pas, monvieux!" * added he, clapping the scared and silent Gerasim on theshoulder. "Well, does no one speak French in this establishment?" heasked again in French, looking around and meeting Pierre's eyes. Pierremoved away from the door.* "Quarters, quarters, lodgings! The French are good fellows. What thedevil! There, don't let us be cross, old fellow!"Again the officer turned to Gerasim and asked him to show him the roomsin the house."Master, not here--don't understand... me, you..." said Gerasim, tryingto render his words more comprehensible by contorting them.Still smiling, the French officer spread out his hands before Gerasim'snose, intimating that he did not understand him either, and moved,limping, to the door at which Pierre was standing. Pierre wished to goaway and conceal himself, but at that moment he saw Makar Alexeevichappearing at the open kitchen door with the pistol in his hand. With amadman's cunning, Makar Alexeevich eyed the Frenchman, raised hispistol, and took aim."Board them!" yelled the tipsy man, trying to press the trigger. Hearingthe yell the officer turned round, and at the same moment Pierre threwhimself on the drunkard. Just when Pierre snatched at and struck up thepistol Makar Alexeevich at last got his fingers on the trigger, therewas a deafening report, and all were enveloped in a cloud of smoke. TheFrenchman turned pale and rushed to the door.Forgetting his intention of concealing his knowledge of French, Pierre,snatching away the pistol and throwing it down, ran up to the officerand addressed him in French."You are not wounded?" he asked."I think not," answered the Frenchman, feeling himself over. "But I havehad a lucky escape this time," he added, pointing to the damaged plasterof the wall. "Who is that man?" said he, looking sternly at Pierre."Oh, I am really in despair at what has occurred," said Pierre rapidly,quite forgetting the part he had intended to play. "He is an unfortunatemadman who did not know what he was doing."The officer went up to Makar Alexeevich and took him by the collar.Makar Alexeevich was standing with parted lips, swaying, as if about tofall asleep, as he leaned against the wall."Brigand! You shall pay for this," said the Frenchman, letting go ofhim. "We French are merciful after victory, but we do not pardontraitors," he added, with a look of gloomy dignity and a fine energeticgesture.Pierre continued, in French, to persuade the officer not to hold thatdrunken imbecile to account. The Frenchman listened in silence with thesame gloomy expression, but suddenly turned to Pierre with a smile. Fora few seconds he looked at him in silence. His handsome face assumed amelodramatically gentle expression and he held out his hand."You have saved my life. You are French," said he.For a Frenchman that deduction was indubitable. Only a Frenchman couldperform a great deed, and to save his life--the life of M. Ramballe,captain of the 13th Light Regiment--was undoubtedly a very great deed.But however indubitable that conclusion and the officer's convictionbased upon it, Pierre felt it necessary to disillusion him."I am Russian," he said quickly."Tut, tut, tut! Tell that to others," said the officer, waving hisfinger before his nose and smiling. "You shall tell me all about thatpresently. I am delighted to meet a compatriot. Well, and what are we todo with this man?" he added, addressing himself to Pierre as to abrother.Even if Pierre were not a Frenchman, having once received that loftiestof human appellations he could not renounce it, said the officer's lookand tone. In reply to his last question Pierre again explained who MakarAlexeevich was and how just before their arrival that drunken imbecilehad seized the loaded pistol which they had not had time to recover fromhim, and begged the officer to let the deed go unpunished.The Frenchman expanded his chest and made a majestic gesture with hisarm."You have saved my life! You are French. You ask his pardon? I grant ityou. Lead that man away!" said he quickly and energetically, and takingthe arm of Pierre whom he had promoted to be a Frenchman for saving hislife, he went with him into the room.The soldiers in the yard, hearing the shot, came into the passage askingwhat had happened, and expressed their readiness to punish the culprits,but the officer sternly checked them."You will be called in when you are wanted," he said.The soldiers went out again, and the orderly, who had meanwhile had timeto visit the kitchen, came up to his officer."Captain, there is soup and a leg of mutton in the kitchen," said he."Shall I serve them up?""Yes, and some wine," answered the captain.CHAPTER XXIXWhen the French officer went into the room with Pierre the latter againthought it his duty to assure him that he was not French and wished togo away, but the officer would not hear of it. He was so very polite,amiable, good-natured, and genuinely grateful to Pierre for saving hislife that Pierre had not the heart to refuse, and sat down with him inthe parlor--the first room they entered. To Pierre's assurances that hewas not a Frenchman, the captain, evidently not understanding how anyonecould decline so flattering an appellation, shrugged his shoulders andsaid that if Pierre absolutely insisted on passing for a Russian let itbe so, but for all that he would be forever bound to Pierre by gratitudefor saving his life.Had this man been endowed with the slightest capacity for perceiving thefeelings of others, and had he at all understood what Pierre's feelingswere, the latter would probably have left him, but the man's animatedobtuseness to everything other than himself disarmed Pierre."A Frenchman or a Russian prince incognito," said the officer, lookingat Pierre's fine though dirty linen and at the ring on his finger. "Iowe my life to you and offer you my friendship. A Frenchman neverforgets either an insult or a service. I offer you my friendship. Thatis all I can say."There was so much good nature and nobility (in the French sense of theword) in the officer's voice, in the expression of his face and in hisgestures, that Pierre, unconsciously smiling in response to theFrenchman's smile, pressed the hand held out to him."Captain Ramballe, of the 13th Light Regiment, Chevalier of the Legionof Honor for the affair on the seventh of September," he introducedhimself, a self-satisfied irrepressible smile puckering his lips underhis mustache. "Will you now be so good as to tell me with whom I havethe honor of conversing so pleasantly, instead of being in the ambulancewith that maniac's bullet in my body?"Pierre replied that he could not tell him his name and, blushing, beganto try to invent a name and to say something about his reason forconcealing it, but the Frenchman hastily interrupted him."Oh, please!" said he. "I understand your reasons. You are an officer...a superior officer perhaps. You have borne arms against us. That's notmy business. I owe you my life. That is enough for me. I am quite atyour service. You belong to the gentry?" he concluded with a shade ofinquiry in his tone. Pierre bent his head. "Your baptismal name, if youplease. That is all I ask. Monsieur Pierre, you say.... That's all Iwant to know."When the mutton and an omelet had been served and a samovar and vodkabrought, with some wine which the French had taken from a Russian cellarand brought with them, Ramballe invited Pierre to share his dinner, andhimself began to eat greedily and quickly like a healthy and hungry man,munching his food rapidly with his strong teeth, continually smackinghis lips, and repeating--"Excellent! Delicious!" His face grew red andwas covered with perspiration. Pierre was hungry and shared the dinnerwith pleasure. Morel, the orderly, brought some hot water in a saucepanand placed a bottle of claret in it. He also brought a bottle of kvass,taken from the kitchen for them to try. That beverage was already knownto the French and had been given a special name. They called it limonadede cochon (pig's lemonade), and Morel spoke well of the limonade decochon he had found in the kitchen. But as the captain had the wine theyhad taken while passing through Moscow, he left the kvass to Morel andapplied himself to the bottle of Bordeaux. He wrapped the bottle up toits neck in a table napkin and poured out wine for himself and forPierre. The satisfaction of his hunger and the wine rendered the captainstill more lively and he chatted incessantly all through dinner."Yes, my dear Monsieur Pierre, I owe you a fine votive candle for savingme from that maniac.... You see, I have bullets enough in my bodyalready. Here is one I got at Wagram" (he touched his side) "and asecond at Smolensk"--he showed a scar on his cheek--"and this leg whichas you see does not want to march, I got that on the seventh at thegreat battle of la Moskowa. Sacre Dieu! It was splendid! That deluge offire was worth seeing. It was a tough job you set us there, my word! Youmay be proud of it! And on my honor, in spite of the cough I caughtthere, I should be ready to begin again. I pity those who did not seeit.""I was there," said Pierre."Bah, really? So much the better! You are certainly brave foes. Thegreat redoubt held out well, by my pipe!" continued the Frenchman. "Andyou made us pay dear for it. I was at it three times--sure as I sithere. Three times we reached the guns and three times we were thrownback like cardboard figures. Oh, it was beautiful, Monsieur Pierre! Yourgrenadiers were splendid, by heaven! I saw them close up their ranks sixtimes in succession and march as if on parade. Fine fellows! Our King ofNaples, who knows what's what, cried 'Bravo!' Ha, ha! So you are one ofus soldiers!" he added, smiling, after a momentary pause. "So much thebetter, so much the better, Monsieur Pierre! Terrible in battle...gallant... with the fair" (he winked and smiled), "that's what theFrench are, Monsieur Pierre, aren't they?"The captain was so naively and good-humoredly gay, so real, and sopleased with himself that Pierre almost winked back as he looked merrilyat him. Probably the word "gallant" turned the captain's thoughts to thestate of Moscow."Apropos, tell me please, is it true that the women have all leftMoscow? What a queer idea! What had they to be afraid of?""Would not the French ladies leave Paris if the Russians entered it?"asked Pierre."Ha, ha, ha!" The Frenchman emitted a merry, sanguine chuckle, pattingPierre on the shoulder. "What a thing to say!" he exclaimed. "Paris?...But Paris, Paris...""Paris--the capital of the world," Pierre finished his remark for him.The captain looked at Pierre. He had a habit of stopping short in themiddle of his talk and gazing intently with his laughing, kindly eyes."Well, if you hadn't told me you were Russian, I should have wageredthat you were Parisian! You have that... I don't know what, that..." andhaving uttered this compliment, he again gazed at him in silence."I have been in Paris. I spent years there," said Pierre."Oh yes, one sees that plainly. Paris!... A man who doesn't know Parisis a savage. You can tell a Parisian two leagues off. Paris is Talma, laDuchenois, Potier, the Sorbonne, the boulevards," and noticing that hisconclusion was weaker than what had gone before, he added quickly:"There is only one Paris in the world. You have been to Paris and haveremained Russian. Well, I don't esteem you the less for it."Under the influence of the wine he had drunk, and after the days he hadspent alone with his depressing thoughts, Pierre involuntarily enjoyedtalking with this cheerful and good-natured man."To return to your ladies--I hear they are lovely. What a wretched ideato go and bury themselves in the steppes when the French army is inMoscow. What a chance those girls have missed! Your peasants, now--that's another thing; but you civilized people, you ought to know usbetter than that. We took Vienna, Berlin, Madrid, Naples, Rome, Warsaw,all the world's capitals.... We are feared, but we are loved. We arenice to know. And then the Emperor..." he began, but Pierre interruptedhim."The Emperor," Pierre repeated, and his face suddenly became sad andembarrassed, "is the Emperor...?""The Emperor? He is generosity, mercy, justice, order, genius--that'swhat the Emperor is! It is I, Ramballe, who tell you so.... I assure youI was his enemy eight years ago. My father was an emigrant count.... Butthat man has vanquished me. He has taken hold of me. I could not resistthe sight of the grandeur and glory with which he has covered France.When I understood what he wanted--when I saw that he was preparing a bedof laurels for us, you know, I said to myself: 'That is a monarch,' andI devoted myself to him! So there! Oh yes, mon cher, he is the greatestman of the ages past or future.""Is he in Moscow?" Pierre stammered with a guilty look.The Frenchman looked at his guilty face and smiled."No, he will make his entry tomorrow," he replied, and continued histalk.Their conversation was interrupted by the cries of several voices at thegate and by Morel, who came to say that some Wurttemberg hussars hadcome and wanted to put up their horses in the yard where the captain'shorses were. This difficulty had arisen chiefly because the hussars didnot understand what was said to them in French.The captain had their senior sergeant called in, and in a stern voiceasked him to what regiment he belonged, who was his commanding officer,and by what right he allowed himself to claim quarters that were alreadyoccupied. The German who knew little French, answered the two firstquestions by giving the names of his regiment and of his commandingofficer, but in reply to the third question which he did not understandsaid, introducing broken French into his own German, that he was thequartermaster of the regiment and his commander had ordered him tooccupy all the houses one after another. Pierre, who knew German,translated what the German said to the captain and gave the captain'sreply to the Wurttemberg hussar in German. When he had understood whatwas said to him, the German submitted and took his men elsewhere. Thecaptain went out into the porch and gave some orders in a loud voice.When he returned to the room Pierre was sitting in the same place asbefore, with his head in his hands. His face expressed suffering. Hereally was suffering at that moment. When the captain went out and hewas left alone, suddenly he came to himself and realized the position hewas in. It was not that Moscow had been taken or that the happyconquerors were masters in it and were patronizing him. Painful as thatwas it was not that which tormented Pierre at the moment. He wastormented by the consciousness of his own weakness. The few glasses ofwine he had drunk and the conversation with this good-natured man haddestroyed the mood of concentrated gloom in which he had spent the lastfew days and which was essential for the execution of his design. Thepistol, dagger, and peasant coat were ready. Napoleon was to enter thetown next day. Pierre still considered that it would be a useful andworthy action to slay the evildoer, but now he felt that he would not doit. He did not know why, but he felt a foreboding that he would notcarry out his intention. He struggled against the confession of hisweakness but dimly felt that he could not overcome it and that hisformer gloomy frame of mind, concerning vengeance, killing, and self-sacrifice, had been dispersed like dust by contact with the first man hemet.The captain returned to the room, limping slightly and whistling a tune.The Frenchman's chatter which had previously amused Pierre now repelledhim. The tune he was whistling, his gait, and the gesture with which hetwirled his mustache, all now seemed offensive. "I will go awayimmediately. I won't say another word to him," thought Pierre. Hethought this, but still sat in the same place. A strange feeling ofweakness tied him to the spot; he wished to get up and go away, butcould not do so.The captain, on the other hand, seemed very cheerful. He paced up anddown the room twice. His eyes shone and his mustache twitched as if hewere smiling to himself at some amusing thought."The colonel of those Wurttembergers is delightful," he suddenly said."He's a German, but a nice fellow all the same.... But he's a German."He sat down facing Pierre. "By the way, you know German, then?"Pierre looked at him in silence."What is the German for 'shelter'?""Shelter?" Pierre repeated. "The German for shelter is Unterkunft.""How do you say it?" the captain asked quickly and doubtfully."Unterkunft," Pierre repeated."Onterkoff," said the captain and looked at Pierre for some seconds withlaughing eyes. "These Germans are first-rate fools, don't you think so,Monsieur Pierre?" he concluded."Well, let's have another bottle of this Moscow Bordeaux, shall we?Morel will warm us up another little bottle. Morel!" he called outgaily.Morel brought candles and a bottle of wine. The captain looked at Pierreby the candlelight and was evidently struck by the troubled expressionon his companion's face. Ramballe, with genuine distress and sympathy inhis face, went up to Pierre and bent over him."There now, we're sad," said he, touching Pierre's hand. "Have I upsetyou? No, really, have you anything against me?" he asked Pierre."Perhaps it's the state of affairs?"Pierre did not answer, but looked cordially into the Frenchman's eyeswhose expression of sympathy was pleasing to him."Honestly, without speaking of what I owe you, I feel friendship foryou. Can I do anything for you? Dispose of me. It is for life and death.I say it with my hand on my heart!" said he, striking his chest."Thank you," said Pierre.The captain gazed intently at him as he had done when he learned that"shelter" was Unterkunft in German, and his face suddenly brightened."Well, in that case, I drink to our friendship!" he cried gaily, fillingtwo glasses with wine.Pierre took one of the glasses and emptied it. Ramballe emptied his too,again pressed Pierre's hand, and leaned his elbows on the table in apensive attitude."Yes, my dear friend," he began, "such is fortune's caprice. Who wouldhave said that I should be a soldier and a captain of dragoons in theservice of Bonaparte, as we used to call him? Yet here I am in Moscowwith him. I must tell you, mon cher," he continued in the sad andmeasured tones of a man who intends to tell a long story, "that our nameis one of the most ancient in France."And with a Frenchman's easy and naive frankness the captain told Pierrethe story of his ancestors, his childhood, youth, and manhood, and allabout his relations and his financial and family affairs, "ma pauvremere" playing of course an important part in the story."But all that is only life's setting, the real thing is love--love! Am Inot right, Monsieur Pierre?" said he, growing animated. "Another glass?"Pierre again emptied his glass and poured himself out a third."Oh, women, women!" and the captain, looking with glistening eyes atPierre, began talking of love and of his love affairs.There were very many of these, as one could easily believe, looking atthe officer's handsome, self-satisfied face, and noting the eagerenthusiasm with which he spoke of women. Though all Ramballe's lovestories had the sensual character which Frenchmen regard as the specialcharm and poetry of love, yet he told his story with such sincereconviction that he alone had experienced and known all the charm of loveand he described women so alluringly that Pierre listened to him withcuriosity.It was plain that l'amour which the Frenchman was so fond of was notthat low and simple kind that Pierre had once felt for his wife, nor wasit the romantic love stimulated by himself that he experienced forNatasha. (Ramballe despised both these kinds of love equally: the one heconsidered the "love of clodhoppers" and the other the "love ofsimpletons.") L'amour which the Frenchman worshiped consistedprincipally in the unnaturalness of his relation to the woman and in acombination of incongruities giving the chief charm to the feeling.Thus the captain touchingly recounted the story of his love for afascinating marquise of thirty-five and at the same time for a charming,innocent child of seventeen, daughter of the bewitching marquise. Theconflict of magnanimity between the mother and the daughter, ending inthe mother's sacrificing herself and offering her daughter in marriageto her lover, even now agitated the captain, though it was the memory ofa distant past. Then he recounted an episode in which the husband playedthe part of the lover, and he--the lover--assumed the role of thehusband, as well as several droll incidents from his recollections ofGermany, where "shelter" is called Unterkunft and where the husbands eatsauerkraut and the young girls are "too blonde."Finally, the latest episode in Poland still fresh in the captain'smemory, and which he narrated with rapid gestures and glowing face, wasof how he had saved the life of a Pole (in general, the saving of lifecontinually occurred in the captain's stories) and the Pole hadentrusted to him his enchanting wife (parisienne de coeur) while himselfentering the French service. The captain was happy, the enchantingPolish lady wished to elope with him, but, prompted by magnanimity, thecaptain restored the wife to the husband, saying as he did so: "I havesaved your life, and I save your honor!" Having repeated these words thecaptain wiped his eyes and gave himself a shake, as if driving away theweakness which assailed him at this touching recollection.Listening to the captain's tales, Pierre--as often happens late in theevening and under the influence of wine--followed all that was told him,understood it all, and at the same time followed a train of personalmemories which, he knew not why, suddenly arose in his mind. Whilelistening to these love stories his own love for Natasha unexpectedlyrose to his mind, and going over the pictures of that love in hisimagination he mentally compared them with Ramballe's tales. Listeningto the story of the struggle between love and duty, Pierre saw beforehis eyes every minutest detail of his last meeting with the object ofhis love at the Sukharev water tower. At the time of that meeting it hadnot produced an effect upon him--he had not even once recalled it. Butnow it seemed to him that that meeting had had in it something veryimportant and poetic."Peter Kirilovich, come here! We have recognized you," he now seemed tohear the words she had uttered and to see before him her eyes, hersmile, her traveling hood, and a stray lock of her hair... and thereseemed to him something pathetic and touching in all this.Having finished his tale about the enchanting Polish lady, the captainasked Pierre if he had ever experienced a similar impulse to sacrificehimself for love and a feeling of envy of the legitimate husband.Challenged by this question Pierre raised his head and felt a need toexpress the thoughts that filled his mind. He began to explain that heunderstood love for a women somewhat differently. He said that in allhis life he had loved and still loved only one woman, and that she couldnever be his."Tiens!" said the captain.Pierre then explained that he had loved this woman from his earliestyears, but that he had not dared to think of her because she was tooyoung, and because he had been an illegitimate son without a name.Afterwards when he had received a name and wealth he dared not think ofher because he loved her too well, placing her far above everything inthe world, and especially therefore above himself.When he had reached this point, Pierre asked the captain whether heunderstood that.The captain made a gesture signifying that even if he did not understandit he begged Pierre to continue."Platonic love, clouds..." he muttered.Whether it was the wine he had drunk, or an impulse of frankness, or thethought that this man did not, and never would, know any of those whoplayed a part in his story, or whether it was all these things together,something loosened Pierre's tongue. Speaking thickly and with a farawaylook in his shining eyes, he told the whole story of his life: hismarriage, Natasha's love for his best friend, her betrayal of him, andall his own simple relations with her. Urged on by Ramballe's questionshe also told what he had at first concealed--his own position and evenhis name.More than anything else in Pierre's story the captain was impressed bythe fact that Pierre was very rich, had two mansions in Moscow, and thathe had abandoned everything and not left the city, but remained thereconcealing his name and station.When it was late at night they went out together into the street. Thenight was warm and light. To the left of the house on the Pokrovka afire glowed--the first of those that were beginning in Moscow. To theright and high up in the sky was the sickle of the waning moon andopposite to it hung that bright comet which was connected in Pierre'sheart with his love. At the gate stood Gerasim, the cook, and twoFrenchmen. Their laughter and their mutually incomprehensible remarks intwo languages could be heard. They were looking at the glow seen in thetown.There was nothing terrible in the one small, distant fire in the immensecity.Gazing at the high starry sky, at the moon, at the comet, and at theglow from the fire, Pierre experienced a joyful emotion. "There now, howgood it is, what more does one need?" thought he. And suddenlyremembering his intention he grew dizzy and felt so faint that he leanedagainst the fence to save himself from falling.Without taking leave of his new friend, Pierre left the gate withunsteady steps and returning to his room lay down on the sofa andimmediately fell asleep.CHAPTER XXXThe glow of the first fire that began on the second of September waswatched from the various roads by the fugitive Muscovites and by theretreating troops, with many different feelings.The Rostov party spent the night at Mytishchi, fourteen miles fromMoscow. They had started so late on the first of September, the road hadbeen so blocked by vehicles and troops, so many things had beenforgotten for which servants were sent back, that they had decided tospend that night at a place three miles out of Moscow. The next morningthey woke late and were again delayed so often that they only got as faras Great Mytishchi. At ten o'clock that evening the Rostov family andthe wounded traveling with them were all distributed in the yards andhuts of that large village. The Rostovs' servants and coachmen and theorderlies of the wounded officers, after attending to their masters, hadsupper, fed the horses, and came out into the porches.In a neighboring hut lay Raevski's adjutant with a fractured wrist. Theawful pain he suffered made him moan incessantly and piteously, and hismoaning sounded terrible in the darkness of the autumn night. He hadspent the first night in the same yard as the Rostovs. The countess saidshe had been unable to close her eyes on account of his moaning, and atMytishchi she moved into a worse hut simply to be farther away from thewounded man.In the darkness of the night one of the servants noticed, above the highbody of a coach standing before the porch, the small glow of anotherfire. One glow had long been visible and everybody knew that it wasLittle Mytishchi burning--set on fire by Mamonov's Cossacks."But look here, brothers, there's another fire!" remarked an orderly.All turned their attention to the glow."But they told us Little Mytishchi had been set on fire by Mamonov'sCossacks.""But that's not Mytishchi, it's farther away.""Look, it must be in Moscow!"Two of the gazers went round to the other side of the coach and sat downon its steps."It's more to the left, why, Little Mytishchi is over there, and this isright on the other side."Several men joined the first two."See how it's flaring," said one. "That's a fire in Moscow: either inthe Sushchevski or the Rogozhski quarter."No one replied to this remark and for some time they all gazed silentlyat the spreading flames of the second fire in the distance.Old Daniel Terentich, the count's valet (as he was called), came up tothe group and shouted at Mishka."What are you staring at, you good-for-nothing?... The count will becalling and there's nobody there; go and gather the clothes together.""I only ran out to get some water," said Mishka."But what do you think, Daniel Terentich? Doesn't it look as if thatglow were in Moscow?" remarked one of the footmen.Daniel Terentich made no reply, and again for a long time they were allsilent. The glow spread, rising and falling, farther and farther still."God have mercy.... It's windy and dry..." said another voice."Just look! See what it's doing now. O Lord! You can even see the crowsflying. Lord have mercy on us sinners!""They'll put it out, no fear!""Who's to put it out?" Daniel Terentich, who had hitherto been silent,was heard to say. His voice was calm and deliberate. "Moscow it is,brothers," said he. "Mother Moscow, the white..." his voice faltered,and he gave way to an old man's sob.And it was as if they had all only waited for this to realize thesignificance for them of the glow they were watching. Sighs were heard,words of prayer, and the sobbing of the count's old valet.CHAPTER XXXIThe valet, returning to the cottage, informed the count that Moscow wasburning. The count donned his dressing gown and went out to look. Sonyaand Madame Schoss, who had not yet undressed, went out with him. OnlyNatasha and the countess remained in the room. Petya was no longer withthe family, he had gone on with his regiment which was making forTroitsa.The countess, on hearing that Moscow was on fire, began to cry. Natasha,pale, with a fixed look, was sitting on the bench under the icons justwhere she had sat down on arriving and paid no attention to her father'swords. She was listening to the ceaseless moaning of the adjutant, threehouses off."Oh, how terrible," said Sonya returning from the yard chilled andfrightened. "I believe the whole of Moscow will burn, there's an awfulglow! Natasha, do look! You can see it from the window," she said to hercousin, evidently wishing to distract her mind.But Natasha looked at her as if not understanding what was said to herand again fixed her eyes on the corner of the stove. She had been inthis condition of stupor since the morning, when Sonya, to the surpriseand annoyance of the countess, had for some unaccountable reason foundit necessary to tell Natasha of Prince Andrew's wound and of his beingwith their party. The countess had seldom been so angry with anyone asshe was with Sonya. Sonya had cried and begged to be forgiven and now,as if trying to atone for her fault, paid unceasing attention to hercousin."Look, Natasha, how dreadfully it is burning!" said she."What's burning?" asked Natasha. "Oh, yes, Moscow."And as if in order not to offend Sonya and to get rid of her, she turnedher face to the window, looked out in such a way that it was evidentthat she could not see anything, and again settled down in her formerattitude."But you didn't see it!""Yes, really I did," Natasha replied in a voice that pleaded to be leftin peace.Both the countess and Sonya understood that, naturally, neither Moscownor the burning of Moscow nor anything else could seem of importance toNatasha.The count returned and lay down behind the partition. The countess wentup to her daughter and touched her head with the back of her hand as shewas wont to do when Natasha was ill, then touched her forehead with herlips as if to feel whether she was feverish, and finally kissed her."You are cold. You are trembling all over. You'd better lie down," saidthe countess."Lie down? All right, I will. I'll lie down at once," said Natasha.When Natasha had been told that morning that Prince Andrew was seriouslywounded and was traveling with their party, she had at first asked manyquestions: Where was he going? How was he wounded? Was it serious? Andcould she see him? But after she had been told that she could not seehim, that he was seriously wounded but that his life was not in danger,she ceased to ask questions or to speak at all, evidently disbelievingwhat they told her, and convinced that say what she might she wouldstill be told the same. All the way she had sat motionless in a cornerof the coach with wide open eyes, and the expression in them which thecountess knew so well and feared so much, and now she sat in the sameway on the bench where she had seated herself on arriving. She wasplanning something and either deciding or had already decided somethingin her mind. The countess knew this, but what it might be she did notknow, and this alarmed and tormented her."Natasha, undress, darling; lie down on my bed."A bed had been made on a bedstead for the countess only. Madame Schossand the two girls were to sleep on some hay on the floor."No, Mamma, I will lie down here on the floor," Natasha repliedirritably and she went to the window and opened it. Through the openwindow the moans of the adjutant could be heard more distinctly. She puther head out into the damp night air, and the countess saw her slim neckshaking with sobs and throbbing against the window frame. Natasha knewit was not Prince Andrew who was moaning. She knew Prince Andrew was inthe same yard as themselves and in a part of the hut across the passage;but this dreadful incessant moaning made her sob. The countess exchangeda look with Sonya."Lie down, darling; lie down, my pet," said the countess, softlytouching Natasha's shoulders. "Come, lie down.""Oh, yes... I'll lie down at once," said Natasha, and began hurriedlyundressing, tugging at the tapes of her petticoat.When she had thrown off her dress and put on a dressing jacket, she satdown with her foot under her on the bed that had been made up on thefloor, jerked her thin and rather short plait of hair to the front, andbegan replaiting it. Her long, thin, practiced fingers rapidlyunplaited, replaited, and tied up her plait. Her head moved from side toside from habit, but her eyes, feverishly wide, looked fixedly beforeher. When her toilet for the night was finished she sank gently onto thesheet spread over the hay on the side nearest the door."Natasha, you'd better lie in the middle," said Sonya."I'll stay here," muttered Natasha. "Do lie down," she added crossly,and buried her face in the pillow.The countess, Madame Schoss, and Sonya undressed hastily and lay down.The small lamp in front of the icons was the only light left in theroom. But in the yard there was a light from the fire at LittleMytishchi a mile and a half away, and through the night came the noiseof people shouting at a tavern Mamonov's Cossacks had set up across thestreet, and the adjutant's unceasing moans could still be heard.For a long time Natasha listened attentively to the sounds that reachedher from inside and outside the room and did not move. First she heardher mother praying and sighing and the creaking of her bed under her,then Madame Schoss' familiar whistling snore and Sonya's gentlebreathing. Then the countess called to Natasha. Natasha did not answer."I think she's asleep, Mamma," said Sonya softly.After a short silence the countess spoke again but this time no onereplied.Soon after that Natasha heard her mother's even breathing. Natasha didnot move, though her little bare foot, thrust out from under the quilt,was growing cold on the bare floor.As if to celebrate a victory over everybody, a cricket chirped in acrack in the wall. A cock crowed far off and another replied near by.The shouting in the tavern had died down; only the moaning of theadjutant was heard. Natasha sat up."Sonya, are you asleep? Mamma?" she whispered.No one replied. Natasha rose slowly and carefully, crossed herself, andstepped cautiously on the cold and dirty floor with her slim, supple,bare feet. The boards of the floor creaked. Stepping cautiously from onefoot to the other she ran like a kitten the few steps to the door andgrasped the cold door handle.It seemed to her that something heavy was beating rhythmically againstall the walls of the room: it was her own heart, sinking with alarm andterror and overflowing with love.She opened the door and stepped across the threshold and onto the cold,damp earthen floor of the passage. The cold she felt refreshed her. Withher bare feet she touched a sleeping man, stepped over him, and openedthe door into the part of the hut where Prince Andrew lay. It was darkin there. In the farthest corner, on a bench beside a bed on whichsomething was lying, stood a tallow candle with a long, thick, andsmoldering wick.From the moment she had been told that morning of Prince Andrew's woundand his presence there, Natasha had resolved to see him. She did notknow why she had to, she knew the meeting would be painful, but felt themore convinced that it was necessary.All day she had lived only in hope of seeing him that night. But nowthat the moment had come she was filled with dread of what she mightsee. How was he maimed? What was left of him? Was he like that incessantmoaning of the adjutant's? Yes, he was altogether like that. In herimagination he was that terrible moaning personified. When she saw anindistinct shape in the corner, and mistook his knees raised under thequilt for his shoulders, she imagined a horrible body there, and stoodstill in terror. But an irresistible impulse drew her forward. Shecautiously took one step and then another, and found herself in themiddle of a small room containing baggage. Another man--Timokhin--waslying in a corner on the benches beneath the icons, and two others--thedoctor and a valet--lay on the floor.The valet sat up and whispered something. Timokhin, kept awake by thepain in his wounded leg, gazed with wide-open eyes at this strangeapparition of a girl in a white chemise, dressing jacket, and nightcap.The valet's sleepy, frightened exclamation, "What do you want? What'sthe matter?" made Natasha approach more swiftly to what was lying in thecorner. Horribly unlike a man as that body looked, she must see him. Shepassed the valet, the snuff fell from the candle wick, and she sawPrince Andrew clearly with his arms outside the quilt, and such as shehad always seen him.He was the same as ever, but the feverish color of his face, hisglittering eyes rapturously turned toward her, and especially his neck,delicate as a child's, revealed by the turn-down collar of his shirt,gave him a peculiarly innocent, childlike look, such as she had neverseen on him before. She went up to him and with a swift, flexible,youthful movement dropped on her knees.He smiled and held out his hand to her.CHAPTER XXXIISeven days had passed since Prince Andrew found himself in the ambulancestation on the field of Borodino. His feverish state and theinflammation of his bowels, which were injured, were in the doctor'sopinion sure to carry him off. But on the seventh day he ate withpleasure a piece of bread with some tea, and the doctor noticed that histemperature was lower. He had regained consciousness that morning. Thefirst night after they left Moscow had been fairly warm and he hadremained in the caleche, but at Mytishchi the wounded man himself askedto be taken out and given some tea. The pain caused by his removal intothe hut had made him groan aloud and again lose consciousness. When hehad been placed on his camp bed he lay for a long time motionless withclosed eyes. Then he opened them and whispered softly: "And the tea?"His remembering such a small detail of everyday life astonished thedoctor. He felt Prince Andrew's pulse, and to his surprise anddissatisfaction found it had improved. He was dissatisfied because heknew by experience that if his patient did not die now, he would do so alittle later with greater suffering. Timokhin, the red-nosed major ofPrince Andrew's regiment, had joined him in Moscow and was being takenalong with him, having been wounded in the leg at the battle ofBorodino. They were accompanied by a doctor, Prince Andrew's valet, hiscoachman, and two orderlies.They gave Prince Andrew some tea. He drank it eagerly, looking withfeverish eyes at the door in front of him as if trying to understand andremember something."I don't want any more. Is Timokhin here?" he asked.Timokhin crept along the bench to him."I am here, your excellency.""How's your wound?""Mine, sir? All right. But how about you?"Prince Andrew again pondered as if trying to remember something."Couldn't one get a book?" he asked."What book?""The Gospels. I haven't one."The doctor promised to procure it for him and began to ask how he wasfeeling. Prince Andrew answered all his questions reluctantly butreasonably, and then said he wanted a bolster placed under him as he wasuncomfortable and in great pain. The doctor and valet lifted the cloakwith which he was covered and, making wry faces at the noisome smell ofmortifying flesh that came from the wound, began examining that dreadfulplace. The doctor was very much displeased about something and made achange in the dressings, turning the wounded man over so that he groanedagain and grew unconscious and delirious from the agony. He kept askingthem to get him the book and put it under him."What trouble would it be to you?" he said. "I have not got one. Pleaseget it for me and put it under for a moment," he pleaded in a piteousvoice.The doctor went into the passage to wash his hands."You fellows have no conscience," said he to the valet who was pouringwater over his hands. "For just one moment I didn't look after you...It's such pain, you know, that I wonder how he can bear it.""By the Lord Jesus Christ, I thought we had put something under him!"said the valet.The first time Prince Andrew understood where he was and what was thematter with him and remembered being wounded and how was when he askedto be carried into the hut after his caleche had stopped at Mytishchi.After growing confused from pain while being carried into the hut heagain regained consciousness, and while drinking tea once more recalledall that had happened to him, and above all vividly remembered themoment at the ambulance station when, at the sight of the sufferings ofa man he disliked, those new thoughts had come to him which promised himhappiness. And those thoughts, though now vague and indefinite, againpossessed his soul. He remembered that he had now a new source ofhappiness and that this happiness had something to do with the Gospels.That was why he asked for a copy of them. The uncomfortable position inwhich they had put him and turned him over again confused his thoughts,and when he came to himself a third time it was in the completestillness of the night. Everybody near him was sleeping. A cricketchirped from across the passage; someone was shouting and singing in thestreet; cockroaches rustled on the table, on the icons, and on thewalls, and a big fly flopped at the head of the bed and around thecandle beside him, the wick of which was charred and had shaped itselflike a mushroom.His mind was not in a normal state. A healthy man usually thinks of,feels, and remembers innumerable things simultaneously, but has thepower and will to select one sequence of thoughts or events on which tofix his whole attention. A healthy man can tear himself away from thedeepest reflections to say a civil word to someone who comes in and canthen return again to his own thoughts. But Prince Andrew's mind was notin a normal state in that respect. All the powers of his mind were moreactive and clearer than ever, but they acted apart from his will. Mostdiverse thoughts and images occupied him simultaneously. At times hisbrain suddenly began to work with a vigor, clearness, and depth it hadnever reached when he was in health, but suddenly in the midst of itswork it would turn to some unexpected idea and he had not the strengthto turn it back again."Yes, a new happiness was revealed to me of which man cannot bedeprived," he thought as he lay in the semidarkness of the quiet hut,gazing fixedly before him with feverish wide open eyes. "A happinesslying beyond material forces, outside the material influences that acton man--a happiness of the soul alone, the happiness of loving. Everyman can understand it, but to conceive it and enjoin it was possibleonly for God. But how did God enjoin that law? And why was the Son...?"And suddenly the sequence of these thoughts broke off, and Prince Andrewheard (without knowing whether it was a delusion or reality) a softwhispering voice incessantly and rhythmically repeating "piti-piti-piti," and then "titi," and then again "piti-piti-piti," and "ti-ti"once more. At the same time he felt that above his face, above the verymiddle of it, some strange airy structure was being erected out ofslender needles or splinters, to the sound of this whispered music. Hefelt that he had to balance carefully (though it was difficult) so thatthis airy structure should not collapse; but nevertheless it keptcollapsing and again slowly rising to the sound of whispered rhythmicmusic--"it stretches, stretches, spreading out and stretching," saidPrince Andrew to himself. While listening to this whispering and feelingthe sensation of this drawing out and the construction of this edificeof needles, he also saw by glimpses a red halo round the candle, andheard the rustle of the cockroaches and the buzzing of the fly thatflopped against his pillow and his face. Each time the fly touched hisface it gave him a burning sensation and yet to his surprise it did notdestroy the structure, though it knocked against the very region of hisface where it was rising. But besides this there was something else ofimportance. It was something white by the door--the statue of a sphinx,which also oppressed him."But perhaps that's my shirt on the table," he thought, "and that's mylegs, and that is the door, but why is it always stretching and drawingitself out, and 'piti-piti-piti' and 'ti-ti' and 'piti-piti-piti'...?That's enough, please leave off!" Prince Andrew painfully entreatedsomeone. And suddenly thoughts and feelings again swam to the surface ofhis mind with peculiar clearness and force."Yes--love," he thought again quite clearly. "But not love which lovesfor something, for some quality, for some purpose, or for some reason,but the love which I--while dying--first experienced when I saw my enemyand yet loved him. I experienced that feeling of love which is the veryessence of the soul and does not require an object. Now again I feelthat bliss. To love one's neighbors, to love one's enemies, to loveeverything, to love God in all His manifestations. It is possible tolove someone dear to you with human love, but an enemy can only be lovedby divine love. That is why I experienced such joy when I felt that Iloved that man. What has become of him? Is he alive?..."When loving with human love one may pass from love to hatred, butdivine love cannot change. No, neither death nor anything else candestroy it. It is the very essence of the soul. Yet how many people haveI hated in my life? And of them all, I loved and hated none as I didher." And he vividly pictured to himself Natasha, not as he had done inthe past with nothing but her charms which gave him delight, but for thefirst time picturing to himself her soul. And he understood herfeelings, her sufferings, shame, and remorse. He now understood for thefirst time all the cruelty of his rejection of her, the cruelty of hisrupture with her. "If only it were possible for me to see her once more!Just once, looking into those eyes to say...""Piti-piti-piti and ti-ti and piti-piti-piti boom!" flopped the fly...And his attention was suddenly carried into another world, a world ofreality and delirium in which something particular was happening. Inthat world some structure was still being erected and did not fall,something was still stretching out, and the candle with its red halo wasstill burning, and the same shirtlike sphinx lay near the door; butbesides all this something creaked, there was a whiff of fresh air, anda new white sphinx appeared, standing at the door. And that sphinx hadthe pale face and shining eyes of the very Natasha of whom he had justbeen thinking."Oh, how oppressive this continual delirium is," thought Prince Andrew,trying to drive that face from his imagination. But the face remainedbefore him with the force of reality and drew nearer. Prince Andrewwished to return to that former world of pure thought, but he could not,and delirium drew him back into its domain. The soft whispering voicecontinued its rhythmic murmur, something oppressed him and stretchedout, and the strange face was before him. Prince Andrew collected allhis strength in an effort to recover his senses, he moved a little, andsuddenly there was a ringing in his ears, a dimness in his eyes, andlike a man plunged into water he lost consciousness. When he came tohimself, Natasha, that same living Natasha whom of all people he mostlonged to love with this new pure divine love that had been revealed tohim, was kneeling before him. He realized that it was the real livingNatasha, and he was not surprised but quietly happy. Natasha, motionlesson her knees (she was unable to stir), with frightened eyes riveted onhim, was restraining her sobs. Her face was pale and rigid. Only in thelower part of it something quivered.Prince Andrew sighed with relief, smiled, and held out his hand."You?" he said. "How fortunate!"With a rapid but careful movement Natasha drew nearer to him on herknees and, taking his hand carefully, bent her face over it and begankissing it, just touching it lightly with her lips."Forgive me!" she whispered, raising her head and glancing at him."Forgive me!""I love you," said Prince Andrew."Forgive...!""Forgive what?" he asked."Forgive me for what I ha-ve do-ne!" faltered Natasha in a scarcelyaudible, broken whisper, and began kissing his hand more rapidly, justtouching it with her lips."I love you more, better than before," said Prince Andrew, lifting herface with his hand so as to look into her eyes.Those eyes, filled with happy tears, gazed at him timidly,compassionately, and with joyous love. Natasha's thin pale face, withits swollen lips, was more than plain--it was dreadful. But PrinceAndrew did not see that, he saw her shining eyes which were beautiful.They heard the sound of voices behind them.Peter the valet, who was now wide awake, had roused the doctor.Timokhin, who had not slept at all because of the pain in his leg, hadlong been watching all that was going on, carefully covering his barebody with the sheet as he huddled up on his bench."What's this?" said the doctor, rising from his bed. "Please go away,madam!"At that moment a maid sent by the countess, who had noticed herdaughter's absence, knocked at the door.Like a somnambulist aroused from her sleep Natasha went out of the roomand, returning to her hut, fell sobbing on her bed.From that time, during all the rest of the Rostovs' journey, at everyhalting place and wherever they spent a night, Natasha never left thewounded Bolkonski, and the doctor had to admit that he had not expectedfrom a young girl either such firmness or such skill in nursing awounded man.Dreadful as the countess imagined it would be should Prince Andrew diein her daughter's arms during the journey--as, judging by what thedoctor said, it seemed might easily happen--she could not opposeNatasha. Though with the intimacy now established between the woundedman and Natasha the thought occurred that should he recover their formerengagement would be renewed, no one--least of all Natasha and PrinceAndrew--spoke of this: the unsettled question of life and death, whichhung not only over Bolkonski but over all Russia, shut out all otherconsiderations.CHAPTER XXXIIIOn the third of September Pierre awoke late. His head was aching, theclothes in which he had slept without undressing felt uncomfortable onhis body, and his mind had a dim consciousness of something shameful hehad done the day before. That something shameful was his yesterday'sconversation with Captain Ramballe.It was eleven by the clock, but it seemed peculiarly dark out of doors.Pierre rose, rubbed his eyes, and seeing the pistol with an engravedstock which Gerasim had replaced on the writing table, he rememberedwhere he was and what lay before him that very day."Am I not too late?" he thought. "No, probably he won't make his entryinto Moscow before noon."Pierre did not allow himself to reflect on what lay before him, buthastened to act.After arranging his clothes, he took the pistol and was about to go out.But it then occurred to him for the first time that he certainly couldnot carry the weapon in his hand through the streets. It was difficultto hide such a big pistol even under his wide coat. He could not carryit unnoticed in his belt or under his arm. Besides, it had beendischarged, and he had not had time to reload it. "No matter, daggerwill do," he said to himself, though when planning his design he hadmore than once come to the conclusion that the chief mistake made by thestudent in 1809 had been to try to kill Napoleon with a dagger. But ashis chief aim consisted not in carrying out his design, but in provingto himself that he would not abandon his intention and was doing all hecould to achieve it, Pierre hastily took the blunt jagged dagger in agreen sheath which he had bought at the Sukharev market with the pistol,and hid it under his waistcoat.Having tied a girdle over his coat and pulled his cap low on his head,Pierre went down the corridor, trying to avoid making a noise or meetingthe captain, and passed out into the street.The conflagration, at which he had looked with so much indifference theevening before, had greatly increased during the night. Moscow was onfire in several places. The buildings in Carriage Row, across the river,in the Bazaar and the Povarskoy, as well as the barges on the MoskvaRiver and the timber yards by the Dorogomilov Bridge, were all ablaze.Pierre's way led through side streets to the Povarskoy and from there tothe church of St. Nicholas on the Arbat, where he had long beforedecided that the deed should be done. The gates of most of the houseswere locked and the shutters up. The streets and lanes were deserted.The air was full of smoke and the smell of burning. Now and then he metRussians with anxious and timid faces, and Frenchmen with an air not ofthe city but of the camp, walking in the middle of the streets. Both theRussians and the French looked at Pierre with surprise. Besides hisheight and stoutness, and the strange morose look of suffering in hisface and whole figure, the Russians stared at Pierre because they couldnot make out to what class he could belong. The French followed him withastonishment in their eyes chiefly because Pierre, unlike all the otherRussians who gazed at the French with fear and curiosity, paid noattention to them. At the gate of one house three Frenchmen, who wereexplaining something to some Russians who did not understand them,stopped Pierre asking if he did not know French.Pierre shook his head and went on. In another side street a sentinelstanding beside a green caisson shouted at him, but only when the shoutwas threateningly repeated and he heard the click of the man's musket ashe raised it did Pierre understand that he had to pass on the other sideof the street. He heard nothing and saw nothing of what went on aroundhim. He carried his resolution within himself in terror and haste, likesomething dreadful and alien to him, for, after the previous night'sexperience, he was afraid of losing it. But he was not destined to bringhis mood safely to his destination. And even had he not been hindered byanything on the way, his intention could not now have been carried out,for Napoleon had passed the Arbat more than four hours previously on hisway from the Dorogomilov suburb to the Kremlin, and was now sitting in avery gloomy frame of mind in a royal study in the Kremlin, givingdetailed and exact orders as to measures to be taken immediately toextinguish the fire, to prevent looting, and to reassure theinhabitants. But Pierre did not know this; he was entirely absorbed inwhat lay before him, and was tortured--as those are who obstinatelyundertake a task that is impossible for them not because of itsdifficulty but because of its incompatibility with their natures--by thefear of weakening at the decisive moment and so losing his self-esteem.Though he heard and saw nothing around him he found his way by instinctand did not go wrong in the side streets that led to the Povarskoy.As Pierre approached that street the smoke became denser and denser--heeven felt the heat of the fire. Occasionally curly tongues of flame rosefrom under the roofs of the houses. He met more people in the streetsand they were more excited. But Pierre, though he felt that somethingunusual was happening around him, did not realize that he wasapproaching the fire. As he was going along a foot path across a wide-open space adjoining the Povarskoy on one side and the gardens of PrinceGruzinski's house on the other, Pierre suddenly heard the desperateweeping of a woman close to him. He stopped as if awakening from a dreamand lifted his head.By the side of the path, on the dusty dry grass, all sorts of householdgoods lay in a heap: featherbeds, a samovar, icons, and trunks. On theground, beside the trunks, sat a thin woman no longer young, with long,prominent upper teeth, and wearing a black cloak and cap. This woman,swaying to and fro and muttering something, was choking with sobs. Twogirls of about ten and twelve, dressed in dirty short frocks and cloaks,were staring at their mother with a look of stupefaction on their palefrightened faces. The youngest child, a boy of about seven, who wore anovercoat and an immense cap evidently not his own, was crying in his oldnurse's arms. A dirty, barefooted maid was sitting on a trunk, and,having undone her pale-colored plait, was pulling it straight andsniffing at her singed hair. The woman's husband, a short, round-shouldered man in the undress uniform of a civilian official, withsausage-shaped whiskers and showing under his square-set cap the hairsmoothly brushed forward over his temples, with expressionless face wasmoving the trunks, which were placed one on another, and was draggingsome garments from under them.As soon as she saw Pierre, the woman almost threw herself at his feet."Dear people, good Christians, save me, help me, dear friends... helpus, somebody," she muttered between her sobs. "My girl... My daughter!My youngest daughter is left behind. She's burned! Ooh! Was it for thisI nursed you.... Ooh!""Don't, Mary Nikolievna!" said her husband to her in a low voice,evidently only to justify himself before the stranger. "Sister must havetaken her, or else where can she be?" he added."Monster! Villain!" shouted the woman angrily, suddenly ceasing to weep."You have no heart, you don't feel for your own child! Another man wouldhave rescued her from the fire. But this is a monster and neither a mannor a father! You, honored sir, are a noble man," she went on,addressing Pierre rapidly between her sobs. "The fire broke outalongside, and blew our way, the maid called out 'Fire!' and we rushedto collect our things. We ran out just as we were.... This is what wehave brought away.... The icons, and my dowry bed, all the rest is lost.We seized the children. But not Katie! Ooh! O Lord!..." and again shebegan to sob. "My child, my dear one! Burned, burned!""But where was she left?" asked Pierre.From the expression of his animated face the woman saw that this manmight help her."Oh, dear sir!" she cried, seizing him by the legs. "My benefactor, setmy heart at ease.... Aniska, go, you horrid girl, show him the way!" shecried to the maid, angrily opening her mouth and still farther exposingher long teeth."Show me the way, show me, I... I'll do it," gasped Pierre rapidly.The dirty maidservant stepped from behind the trunk, put up her plait,sighed, and went on her short, bare feet along the path. Pierre felt asif he had come back to life after a heavy swoon. He held his headhigher, his eyes shone with the light of life, and with swift steps hefollowed the maid, overtook her, and came out on the Povarskoy. Thewhole street was full of clouds of black smoke. Tongues of flame hereand there broke through that cloud. A great number of people crowded infront of the conflagration. In the middle of the street stood a Frenchgeneral saying something to those around him. Pierre, accompanied by themaid, was advancing to the spot where the general stood, but the Frenchsoldiers stopped him."On ne passe pas!" * cried a voice.* "You can't pass!""This way, uncle," cried the girl. "We'll pass through the side street,by the Nikulins'!"Pierre turned back, giving a spring now and then to keep up with her.She ran across the street, turned down a side street to the left, and,passing three houses, turned into a yard on the right."It's here, close by," said she and, running across the yard, opened agate in a wooden fence and, stopping, pointed out to him a small woodenwing of the house, which was burning brightly and fiercely. One of itssides had fallen in, another was on fire, and bright flames issued fromthe openings of the windows and from under the roof.As Pierre passed through the fence gate, he was enveloped by hot air andinvoluntarily stopped."Which is it? Which is your house?" he asked."Ooh!" wailed the girl, pointing to the wing. "That's it, that was ourlodging. You've burned to death, our treasure, Katie, my precious littlemissy! Ooh!" lamented Aniska, who at the sight of the fire felt that shetoo must give expression to her feelings.Pierre rushed to the wing, but the heat was so great that heinvoluntarily passed round in a curve and came upon the large house thatwas as yet burning only at one end, just below the roof, and aroundwhich swarmed a crowd of Frenchmen. At first Pierre did not realize whatthese men, who were dragging something out, were about; but seeingbefore him a Frenchman hitting a peasant with a blunt saber and tryingto take from him a fox-fur coat, he vaguely understood that looting wasgoing on there, but he had no time to dwell on that idea.The sounds of crackling and the din of falling walls and ceilings, thewhistle and hiss of the flames, the excited shouts of the people, andthe sight of the swaying smoke, now gathering into thick black cloudsand now soaring up with glittering sparks, with here and there densesheaves of flame (now red and now like golden fish scales creeping alongthe walls), and the heat and smoke and rapidity of motion, produced onPierre the usual animating effects of a conflagration. It had apeculiarly strong effect on him because at the sight of the fire he felthimself suddenly freed from the ideas that had weighed him down. He feltyoung, bright, adroit, and resolute. He ran round to the other side ofthe lodge and was about to dash into that part of it which was stillstanding, when just above his head he heard several voices shouting andthen a cracking sound and the ring of something heavy falling closebeside him.Pierre looked up and saw at a window of the large house some Frenchmenwho had just thrown out the drawer of a chest, filled with metalarticles. Other French soldiers standing below went up to the drawer."What does this fellow want?" shouted one of them referring to Pierre."There's a child in that house. Haven't you seen a child?" cried Pierre."What's he talking about? Get along!" said several voices, and one ofthe soldiers, evidently afraid that Pierre might want to take from themsome of the plate and bronzes that were in the drawer, movedthreateningly toward him."A child?" shouted a Frenchman from above. "I did hear somethingsquealing in the garden. Perhaps it's his brat that the fellow islooking for. After all, one must be human, you know....""Where is it? Where?" said Pierre."There! There!" shouted the Frenchman at the window, pointing to thegarden at the back of the house. "Wait a bit--I'm coming down."And a minute or two later the Frenchman, a black-eyed fellow with a spoton his cheek, in shirt sleeves, really did jump out of a window on theground floor, and clapping Pierre on the shoulder ran with him into thegarden."Hurry up, you others!" he called out to his comrades. "It's gettinghot."When they reached a gravel path behind the house the Frenchman pulledPierre by the arm and pointed to a round, graveled space where a three-year-old girl in a pink dress was lying under a seat."There is your child! Oh, a girl, so much the better!" said theFrenchman. "Good-bye, Fatty. We must be human, we are all mortal youknow!" and the Frenchman with the spot on his cheek ran back to hiscomrades.Breathless with joy, Pierre ran to the little girl and was going to takeher in his arms. But seeing a stranger the sickly, scrofulous-lookingchild, unattractively like her mother, began to yell and run away.Pierre, however, seized her and lifted her in his arms. She screameddesperately and angrily and tried with her little hands to pull Pierre'shands away and to bite them with her slobbering mouth. Pierre was seizedby a sense of horror and repulsion such as he had experienced whentouching some nasty little animal. But he made an effort not to throwthe child down and ran with her to the large house. It was now, however,impossible to get back the way he had come; the maid, Aniska, was nolonger there, and Pierre with a feeling of pity and disgust pressed thewet, painfully sobbing child to himself as tenderly as he could and ranwith her through the garden seeking another way out.CHAPTER XXXIVHaving run through different yards and side streets, Pierre got backwith his little burden to the Gruzinski garden at the corner of thePovarskoy. He did not at first recognize the place from which he had setout to look for the child, so crowded was it now with people and goodsthat had been dragged out of the houses. Besides Russian families whohad taken refuge here from the fire with their belongings, there wereseveral French soldiers in a variety of clothing. Pierre took no noticeof them. He hurried to find the family of that civil servant in order torestore the daughter to her mother and go to save someone else. Pierrefelt that he had still much to do and to do quickly. Glowing with theheat and from running, he felt at that moment more strongly than everthe sense of youth, animation, and determination that had come on himwhen he ran to save the child. She had now become quiet and, clingingwith her little hands to Pierre's coat, sat on his arm gazing about herlike some little wild animal. He glanced at her occasionally with aslight smile. He fancied he saw something pathetically innocent in thatfrightened, sickly little face.He did not find the civil servant or his wife where he had left them. Hewalked among the crowd with rapid steps, scanning the various faces hemet. Involuntarily he noticed a Georgian or Armenian family consistingof a very handsome old man of Oriental type, wearing a new, cloth-covered, sheepskin coat and new boots, an old woman of similar type, anda young woman. That very young woman seemed to Pierre the perfection ofOriental beauty, with her sharply outlined, arched, black eyebrows andthe extraordinarily soft, bright color of her long, beautiful,expressionless face. Amid the scattered property and the crowd on theopen space, she, in her rich satin cloak with a bright lilac shawl onher head, suggested a delicate exotic plant thrown out onto the snow.She was sitting on some bundles a little behind the old woman, andlooked from under her long lashes with motionless, large, almond-shapedeyes at the ground before her. Evidently she was aware of her beauty andfearful because of it. Her face struck Pierre and, hurrying along by thefence, he turned several times to look at her. When he had reached thefence, still without finding those he sought, he stopped and lookedabout him.With the child in his arms his figure was now more conspicuous thanbefore, and a group of Russians, both men and women, gathered about him."Have you lost anyone, my dear fellow? You're of the gentry yourself,aren't you? Whose child is it?" they asked him.Pierre replied that the child belonged to a woman in a black coat whohad been sitting there with her other children, and he asked whetheranyone knew where she had gone."Why, that must be the Anferovs," said an old deacon, addressing apockmarked peasant woman. "Lord have mercy, Lord have mercy!" he addedin his customary bass."The Anferovs? No," said the woman. "They left in the morning. That mustbe either Mary Nikolievna's or the Ivanovs'!""He says 'a woman,' and Mary Nikolievna is a lady," remarked a houseserf."Do you know her? She's thin, with long teeth," said Pierre."That's Mary Nikolievna! They went inside the garden when these wolvesswooped down," said the woman, pointing to the French soldiers."O Lord, have mercy!" added the deacon."Go over that way, they're there. It's she! She kept on lamenting andcrying," continued the woman. "It's she. Here, this way!"But Pierre was not listening to the woman. He had for some seconds beenintently watching what was going on a few steps away. He was looking atthe Armenian family and at two French soldiers who had gone up to them.One of these, a nimble little man, was wearing a blue coat tied roundthe waist with a rope. He had a nightcap on his head and his feet werebare. The other, whose appearance particularly struck Pierre, was along, lank, round-shouldered, fair-haired man, slow in his movements andwith an idiotic expression of face. He wore a woman's loose gown offrieze, blue trousers, and large torn Hessian boots. The littlebarefooted Frenchman in the blue coat went up to the Armenians and,saying something, immediately seized the old man by his legs and the oldman at once began pulling off his boots. The other in the frieze gownstopped in front of the beautiful Armenian girl and with his hands inhis pockets stood staring at her, motionless and silent."Here, take the child!" said Pierre peremptorily and hurriedly to thewoman, handing the little girl to her. "Give her back to them, give herback!" he almost shouted, putting the child, who began screaming, on theground, and again looking at the Frenchman and the Armenian family.The old man was already sitting barefoot. The little Frenchman hadsecured his second boot and was slapping one boot against the other. Theold man was saying something in a voice broken by sobs, but Pierrecaught but a glimpse of this, his whole attention was directed to theFrenchman in the frieze gown who meanwhile, swaying slowly from side toside, had drawn nearer to the young woman and taking his hands from hispockets had seized her by the neck.The beautiful Armenian still sat motionless and in the same attitude,with her long lashes drooping as if she did not see or feel what thesoldier was doing to her.While Pierre was running the few steps that separated him from theFrenchman, the tall marauder in the frieze gown was already tearing fromher neck the necklace the young Armenian was wearing, and the youngwoman, clutching at her neck, screamed piercingly."Let that woman alone!" exclaimed Pierre hoarsely in a furious voice,seizing the soldier by his round shoulders and throwing him aside.The soldier fell, got up, and ran away. But his comrade, throwing downthe boots and drawing his sword, moved threateningly toward Pierre."Voyons, Pas de betises!" * he cried.* "Look here, no nonsense!"Pierre was in such a transport of rage that he remembered nothing andhis strength increased tenfold. He rushed at the barefooted Frenchmanand, before the latter had time to draw his sword, knocked him off hisfeet and hammered him with his fists. Shouts of approval were heard fromthe crowd around, and at the same moment a mounted patrol of Frenchuhlans appeared from round the corner. The uhlans came up at a trot toPierre and the Frenchman and surrounded them. Pierre remembered nothingof what happened after that. He only remembered beating someone andbeing beaten and finally feeling that his hands were bound and that acrowd of French soldiers stood around him and were searching him."Lieutenant, he has a dagger," were the first words Pierre understood."Ah, a weapon?" said the officer and turned to the barefooted soldierwho had been arrested with Pierre. "All right, you can tell all about itat the court-martial." Then he turned to Pierre. "Do you speak French?"Pierre looked around him with bloodshot eyes and did not reply. His faceprobably looked very terrible, for the officer said something in awhisper and four more uhlans left the ranks and placed themselves onboth sides of Pierre."Do you speak French?" the officer asked again, keeping at a distancefrom Pierre. "Call the interpreter."A little man in Russian civilian clothes rode out from the ranks, and byhis clothes and manner of speaking Pierre at once knew him to be aFrench salesman from one of the Moscow shops."He does not look like a common man," said the interpreter, after asearching look at Pierre."Ah, he looks very much like an incendiary," remarked the officer. "Andask him who he is," he added."Who are you?" asked the interpreter in poor Russian. "You must answerthe chief.""I will not tell you who I am. I am your prisoner--take me!" Pierresuddenly replied in French."Ah, ah!" muttered the officer with a frown. "Well then, march!"A crowd had collected round the uhlans. Nearest to Pierre stood thepockmarked peasant woman with the little girl, and when the patrolstarted she moved forward."Where are they taking you to, you poor dear?" said she. "And the littlegirl, the little girl, what am I to do with her if she's not theirs?"said the woman."What does that woman want?" asked the officer.Pierre was as if intoxicated. His elation increased at the sight of thelittle girl he had saved."What does she want?" he murmured. "She is bringing me my daughter whomI have just saved from the flames," said he. "Good-bye!" And withoutknowing how this aimless lie had escaped him, he went along withresolute and triumphant steps between the French soldiers.The French patrol was one of those sent out through the various streetsof Moscow by Durosnel's order to put a stop to the pillage, andespecially to catch the incendiaries who, according to the generalopinion which had that day originated among the higher French officers,were the cause of the conflagrations. After marching through a number ofstreets the patrol arrested five more Russian suspects: a smallshopkeeper, two seminary students, a peasant, and a house serf, besidesseveral looters. But of all these various suspected characters, Pierrewas considered to be the most suspicious of all. When they had all beenbrought for the night to a large house on the Zubov Rampart that wasbeing used as a guardhouse, Pierre was placed apart under strict guard.BOOK TWELVE: 1812CHAPTER IIn Petersburg at that time a complicated struggle was being carried onwith greater heat than ever in the highest circles, between the partiesof Rumyantsev, the French, Marya Fedorovna, the Tsarevich, and others,drowned as usual by the buzzing of the court drones. But the calm,luxurious life of Petersburg, concerned only about phantoms andreflections of real life, went on in its old way and made it hard,except by a great effort, to realize the danger and the difficultposition of the Russian people. There were the same receptions andballs, the same French theater, the same court interests and serviceinterests and intrigues as usual. Only in the very highest circles wereattempts made to keep in mind the difficulties of the actual position.Stories were whispered of how differently the two Empresses behaved inthese difficult circumstances. The Empress Marya, concerned for thewelfare of the charitable and educational institutions under herpatronage, had given directions that they should all be removed toKazan, and the things belonging to these institutions had already beenpacked up. The Empress Elisabeth, however, when asked what instructionsshe would be pleased to give--with her characteristic Russian patriotismhad replied that she could give no directions about state institutionsfor that was the affair of the sovereign, but as far as she personallywas concerned she would be the last to quit Petersburg.At Anna Pavlovna's on the twenty-sixth of August, the very day of thebattle of Borodino, there was a soiree, the chief feature of which wasto be the reading of a letter from His Lordship the Bishop when sendingthe Emperor an icon of the Venerable Sergius. It was regarded as a modelof ecclesiastical, patriotic eloquence. Prince Vasili himself, famed forhis elocution, was to read it. (He used to read at the Empress'.) Theart of his reading was supposed to lie in rolling out the words, quiteindependently of their meaning, in a loud and singsong voice alternatingbetween a despairing wail and a tender murmur, so that the wail fellquite at random on one word and the murmur on another. This reading, aswas always the case at Anna Pavlovna's soirees, had a politicalsignificance. That evening she expected several important personages whohad to be made ashamed of their visits to the French theater and arousedto a patriotic temper. A good many people had already arrived, but AnnaPavlovna, not yet seeing all those whom she wanted in her drawing room,did not let the reading begin but wound up the springs of a generalconversation.The news of the day in Petersburg was the illness of Countess Bezukhova.She had fallen ill unexpectedly a few days previously, had missedseveral gatherings of which she was usually ornament, and was said to bereceiving no one, and instead of the celebrated Petersburg doctors whousually attended her had entrusted herself to some Italian doctor whowas treating her in some new and unusual way.They all knew very well that the enchanting countess' illness arose froman inconvenience resulting from marrying two husbands at the same time,and that the Italian's cure consisted in removing such inconvenience;but in Anna Pavlovna's presence no one dared to think of this or evenappear to know it."They say the poor countess is very ill. The doctor says it is anginapectoris.""Angina? Oh, that's a terrible illness!""They say that the rivals are reconciled, thanks to the angina..." andthe word angina was repeated with great satisfaction."The count is pathetic, they say. He cried like a child when the doctortold him the case was dangerous.""Oh, it would be a terrible loss, she is an enchanting woman.""You are speaking of the poor countess?" said Anna Pavlovna, coming upjust then. "I sent to ask for news, and hear that she is a littlebetter. Oh, she is certainly the most charming woman in the world," shewent on, with a smile at her own enthusiasm. "We belong to differentcamps, but that does not prevent my esteeming her as she deserves. Sheis very unfortunate!" added Anna Pavlovna.Supposing that by these words Anna Pavlovna was somewhat lifting theveil from the secret of the countess' malady, an unwary young manventured to express surprise that well known doctors had not been calledin and that the countess was being attended by a charlatan who mightemploy dangerous remedies."Your information may be better than mine," Anna Pavlovna suddenly andvenomously retorted on the inexperienced young man, "but I know on goodauthority that this doctor is a very learned and able man. He is privatephysician to the Queen of Spain."And having thus demolished the young man, Anna Pavlovna turned toanother group where Bilibin was talking about the Austrians: havingwrinkled up his face he was evidently preparing to smooth it out againand utter one of his mots."I think it is delightful," he said, referring to a diplomatic note thathad been sent to Vienna with some Austrian banners captured from theFrench by Wittgenstein, "the hero of Petropol" as he was then called inPetersburg."What? What's that?" asked Anna Pavlovna, securing silence for the mot,which she had heard before.And Bilibin repeated the actual words of the diplomatic dispatch, whichhe had himself composed."The Emperor returns these Austrian banners," said Bilibin, "friendlybanners gone astray and found on a wrong path," and his brow becamesmooth again."Charming, charming!" observed Prince Vasili."The path to Warsaw, perhaps," Prince Hippolyte remarked loudly andunexpectedly. Everybody looked at him, understanding what he meant.Prince Hippolyte himself glanced around with amused surprise. He knew nomore than the others what his words meant. During his diplomatic careerhe had more than once noticed that such utterances were received as verywitty, and at every opportunity he uttered in that way the first wordsthat entered his head. "It may turn out very well," he thought, "but ifnot, they'll know how to arrange matters." And really, during theawkward silence that ensued, that insufficiently patriotic personentered whom Anna Pavlovna had been waiting for and wished to convert,and she, smiling and shaking a finger at Hippolyte, invited PrinceVasili to the table and bringing him two candles and the manuscriptbegged him to begin. Everyone became silent."Most Gracious Sovereign and Emperor!" Prince Vasili sternly declaimed,looking round at his audience as if to inquire whether anyone hadanything to say to the contrary. But no one said anything. "Moscow, ourancient capital, the New Jerusalem, receives her Christ"--he placed asudden emphasis on the word her--"as a mother receives her zealous sonsinto her arms, and through the gathering mists, foreseeing the brilliantglory of thy rule, sings in exultation, 'Hosanna, blessed is he thatcometh!'"Prince Vasili pronounced these last words in a tearful voice.Bilibin attentively examined his nails, and many of those presentappeared intimidated, as if asking in what they were to blame. AnnaPavlovna whispered the next words in advance, like an old womanmuttering the prayer at Communion: "Let the bold and insolentGoliath..." she whispered.Prince Vasili continued."Let the bold and insolent Goliath from the borders of France encompassthe realms of Russia with death-bearing terrors; humble Faith, the slingof the Russian David, shall suddenly smite his head in his bloodthirstypride. This icon of the Venerable Sergius, the servant of God andzealous champion of old of our country's weal, is offered to YourImperial Majesty. I grieve that my waning strength prevents rejoicing inthe sight of your most gracious presence. I raise fervent prayers toHeaven that the Almighty may exalt the race of the just, and mercifullyfulfill the desires of Your Majesty.""What force! What a style!" was uttered in approval both of reader andof author.Animated by that address Anna Pavlovna's guests talked for a long timeof the state of the fatherland and offered various conjectures as to theresult of the battle to be fought in a few days."You will see," said Anna Pavlovna, "that tomorrow, on the Emperor'sbirthday, we shall receive news. I have a favorable presentiment!"CHAPTER IIAnna Pavlovna's presentiment was in fact fulfilled. Next day during theservice at the palace church in honor of the Emperor's birthday, PrinceVolkonski was called out of the church and received a dispatch fromPrince Kutuzov. It was Kutuzov's report, written from Tatarinova on theday of the battle. Kutuzov wrote that the Russians had not retreated astep, that the French losses were much heavier than ours, and that hewas writing in haste from the field of battle before collecting fullinformation. It followed that there must have been a victory. And atonce, without leaving the church, thanks were rendered to the Creatorfor His help and for the victory.Anna Pavlovna's presentiment was justified, and all that morning ajoyously festive mood reigned in the city. Everyone believed the victoryto have been complete, and some even spoke of Napoleon's having beencaptured, of his deposition, and of the choice of a new ruler forFrance.It is very difficult for events to be reflected in their real strengthand completeness amid the conditions of court life and far from thescene of action. General events involuntarily group themselves aroundsome particular incident. So now the courtiers' pleasure was based asmuch on the fact that the news had arrived on the Emperor's birthday ason the fact of the victory itself. It was like a successfully arrangedsurprise. Mention was made in Kutuzov's report of the Russian losses,among which figured the names of Tuchkov, Bagration, and Kutaysov. Inthe Petersburg world this sad side of the affair again involuntarilycentered round a single incident: Kutaysov's death. Everybody knew him,the Emperor liked him, and he was young and interesting. That dayeveryone met with the words:"What a wonderful coincidence! Just during the service. But what a lossKutaysov is! How sorry I am!""What did I tell about Kutuzov?" Prince Vasili now said with a prophet'spride. "I always said he was the only man capable of defeatingNapoleon."But next day no news arrived from the army and the public mood grewanxious. The courtiers suffered because of the suffering the suspenseoccasioned the Emperor."Fancy the Emperor's position!" said they, and instead of extollingKutuzov as they had done the day before, they condemned him as the causeof the Emperor's anxiety. That day Prince Vasili no longer boasted ofhis protege Kutuzov, but remained silent when the commander-in-chief wasmentioned. Moreover, toward evening, as if everything conspired to makePetersburg society anxious and uneasy, a terrible piece of news wasadded. Countess Helene Bezukhova had suddenly died of that terriblemalady it had been so agreeable to mention. Officially, at largegatherings, everyone said that Countess Bezukhova had died of a terribleattack of angina pectoris, but in intimate circles details werementioned of how the private physician of the Queen of Spain hadprescribed small doses of a certain drug to produce a certain effect;but Helene, tortured by the fact that the old count suspected her andthat her husband to whom she had written (that wretched, profligatePierre) had not replied, had suddenly taken a very large dose of thedrug, and had died in agony before assistance could be rendered her. Itwas said that Prince Vasili and the old count had turned upon theItalian, but the latter had produced such letters from the unfortunatedeceased that they had immediately let the matter drop.Talk in general centered round three melancholy facts: the Emperor'slack of news, the loss of Kutuzov, and the death of Helene.On the third day after Kutuzov's report a country gentleman arrived fromMoscow, and news of the surrender of Moscow to the French spread throughthe whole town. This was terrible! What a position for the Emperor to bein! Kutuzov was a traitor, and Prince Vasili during the visits ofcondolence paid to him on the occasion of his daughter's death said ofKutuzov, whom he had formerly praised (it was excusable for him in hisgrief to forget what he had said), that it was impossible to expectanything else from a blind and depraved old man."I only wonder that the fate of Russia could have been entrusted to sucha man."As long as this news remained unofficial it was possible to doubt it,but the next day the following communication was received from CountRostopchin:Prince Kutuzov's adjutant has brought me a letter in which he demandspolice officers to guide the army to the Ryazan road. He writes that heis regretfully abandoning Moscow. Sire! Kutuzov's action decides thefate of the capital and of your empire! Russia will shudder to learn ofthe abandonment of the city in which her greatness is centered and inwhich lie the ashes of your ancestors! I shall follow the army. I havehad everything removed, and it only remains for me to weep over the fateof my fatherland.On receiving this dispatch the Emperor sent Prince Volkonski to Kutuzovwith the following rescript:Prince Michael Ilarionovich! Since the twenty-ninth of August I havereceived no communication from you, yet on the first of September Ireceived from the commander-in-chief of Moscow, via Yaroslavl, the sadnews that you, with the army, have decided to abandon Moscow. You canyourself imagine the effect this news has had on me, and your silenceincreases my astonishment. I am sending this by Adjutant-General PrinceVolkonski, to hear from you the situation of the army and the reasonsthat have induced you to take this melancholy decision.CHAPTER IIINine days after the abandonment of Moscow, a messenger from Kutuzovreached Petersburg with the official announcement of that event. Thismessenger was Michaud, a Frenchman who did not know Russian, but who wasquoique etranger, russe de coeur et d'ame, * as he said of himself.* Though a foreigner, Russian in heart and soul.The Emperor at once received this messenger in his study at the palaceon Stone Island. Michaud, who had never seen Moscow before the campaignand who did not know Russian, yet felt deeply moved (as he wrote) whenhe appeared before notre tres gracieux souverain * with the news of theburning of Moscow, dont les flammes eclairaient sa route. *(2)* Our most gracious sovereign.* (2) Whose flames illumined his route.Though the source of M. Michaud's chagrin must have been different fromthat which caused Russians to grieve, he had such a sad face when showninto the Emperor's study that the latter at once asked:"Have you brought me sad news, Colonel?""Very sad, sire," replied Michaud, lowering his eyes with a sigh. "Theabandonment of Moscow.""Have they surrendered my ancient capital without a battle?" asked theEmperor quickly, his face suddenly flushing.Michaud respectfully delivered the message Kutuzov had entrusted to him,which was that it had been impossible to fight before Moscow, and thatas the only remaining choice was between losing the army as well asMoscow, or losing Moscow alone, the field marshal had to choose thelatter.The Emperor listened in silence, not looking at Michaud."Has the enemy entered the city?" he asked."Yes, sire, and Moscow is now in ashes. I left it all in flames,"replied Michaud in a decided tone, but glancing at the Emperor he wasfrightened by what he had done.The Emperor began to breathe heavily and rapidly, his lower liptrembled, and tears instantly appeared in his fine blue eyes.But this lasted only a moment. He suddenly frowned, as if blaminghimself for his weakness, and raising his head addressed Michaud in afirm voice:"I see, Colonel, from all that is happening, that Providence requiresgreat sacrifices of us... I am ready to submit myself in all things toHis will; but tell me, Michaud, how did you leave the army when it sawmy ancient capital abandoned without a battle? Did you not noticediscouragement?..."Seeing that his most gracious ruler was calm once more, Michaud alsogrew calm, but was not immediately ready to reply to the Emperor'sdirect and relevant question which required a direct answer."Sire, will you allow me to speak frankly as befits a loyal soldier?" heasked to gain time."Colonel, I always require it," replied the Emperor. "Conceal nothingfrom me, I wish to know absolutely how things are.""Sire!" said Michaud with a subtle, scarcely perceptible smile on hislips, having now prepared a well-phrased reply, "sire, I left the wholearmy, from its chiefs to the lowest soldier, without exception indesperate and agonized terror...""How is that?" the Emperor interrupted him, frowning sternly. "Wouldmisfortune make my Russians lose heart?... Never!"Michaud had only waited for this to bring out the phrase he hadprepared."Sire," he said, with respectful playfulness, "they are only afraid lestYour Majesty, in the goodness of your heart, should allow yourself to bepersuaded to make peace. They are burning for the combat," declared thisrepresentative of the Russian nation, "and to prove to Your Majesty bythe sacrifice of their lives how devoted they are....""Ah!" said the Emperor reassured, and with a kindly gleam in his eyes,he patted Michaud on the shoulder. "You set me at ease, Colonel."He bent his head and was silent for some time."Well, then, go back to the army," he said, drawing himself up to hisfull height and addressing Michaud with a gracious and majestic gesture,"and tell our brave men and all my good subjects wherever you go thatwhen I have not a soldier left I shall put myself at the head of mybeloved nobility and my good peasants and so use the last resources ofmy empire. It still offers me more than my enemies suppose," said theEmperor growing more and more animated; "but should it ever be ordainedby Divine Providence," he continued, raising to heaven his fine eyesshining with emotion, "that my dynasty should cease to reign on thethrone of my ancestors, then after exhausting all the means at mycommand, I shall let my beard grow to here" (he pointed halfway down hischest) "and go and eat potatoes with the meanest of my peasants, ratherthan sign the disgrace of my country and of my beloved people whosesacrifices I know how to appreciate."Having uttered these words in an agitated voice the Emperor suddenlyturned away as if to hide from Michaud the tears that rose to his eyes,and went to the further end of his study. Having stood there a fewmoments, he strode back to Michaud and pressed his arm below the elbowwith a vigorous movement. The Emperor's mild and handsome face wasflushed and his eyes gleamed with resolution and anger."Colonel Michaud, do not forget what I say to you here, perhaps we mayrecall it with pleasure someday... Napoleon or I," said the Emperor,touching his breast. "We can no longer both reign together. I havelearned to know him, and he will not deceive me any more...."And the Emperor paused, with a frown.When he heard these words and saw the expression of firm resolution inthe Emperor's eyes, Michaud--quoique etranger, russe de coeur et d'ame--at that solemn moment felt himself enraptured by all that he had heard(as he used afterwards to say), and gave expression to his own feelingsand those of the Russian people whose representative he consideredhimself to be, in the following words:"Sire!" said he, "Your Majesty is at this moment signing the glory ofthe nation and the salvation of Europe!"With an inclination of the head the Emperor dismissed him.CHAPTER IVIt is natural for us who were not living in those days to imagine thatwhen half Russia had been conquered and the inhabitants were fleeing todistant provinces, and one levy after another was being raised for thedefense of the fatherland, all Russians from the greatest to the leastwere solely engaged in sacrificing themselves, saving their fatherland,or weeping over its downfall. The tales and descriptions of that timewithout exception speak only of the self-sacrifice, patriotic devotion,despair, grief, and the heroism of the Russians. But it was not reallyso. It appears so to us because we see only the general historicinterest of that time and do not see all the personal human intereststhat people had. Yet in reality those personal interests of the momentso much transcend the general interests that they always prevent thepublic interest from being felt or even noticed. Most of the people atthat time paid no attention to the general progress of events but wereguided only by their private interests, and they were the very peoplewhose activities at that period were most useful.Those who tried to understand the general course of events and to takepart in it by self-sacrifice and heroism were the most useless membersof society, they saw everything upside down, and all they did for thecommon good turned out to be useless and foolish--like Pierre's andMamonov's regiments which looted Russian villages, and the lint theyoung ladies prepared and that never reached the wounded, and so on.Even those, fond of intellectual talk and of expressing their feelings,who discussed Russia's position at the time involuntarily introducedinto their conversation either a shade of pretense and falsehood oruseless condemnation and anger directed against people accused ofactions no one could possibly be guilty of. In historic events the ruleforbidding us to eat of the fruit of the Tree of Knowledge is speciallyapplicable. Only unconscious action bears fruit, and he who plays a partin an historic event never understands its significance. If he tries torealize it his efforts are fruitless.The more closely a man was engaged in the events then taking place inRussia the less did he realize their significance. In Petersburg and inthe provinces at a distance from Moscow, ladies, and gentlemen inmilitia uniforms, wept for Russia and its ancient capital and talked ofself-sacrifice and so on; but in the army which retired beyond Moscowthere was little talk or thought of Moscow, and when they caught sightof its burned ruins no one swore to be avenged on the French, but theythought about their next pay, their next quarters, of Matreshka thevivandiere, and like matters.As the war had caught him in the service, Nicholas Rostov took a closeand prolonged part in the defense of his country, but did so casually,without any aim at self-sacrifice, and he therefore looked at what wasgoing on in Russia without despair and without dismally racking hisbrains over it. Had he been asked what he thought of the state ofRussia, he would have said that it was not his business to think aboutit, that Kutuzov and others were there for that purpose, but that he hadheard that the regiments were to be made up to their full strength, thatfighting would probably go on for a long time yet, and that things beingso it was quite likely he might be in command of a regiment in a coupleof years' time.As he looked at the matter in this way, he learned that he was beingsent to Voronezh to buy remounts for his division, not only withoutregret at being prevented from taking part in the coming battle, butwith the greatest pleasure--which he did not conceal and which hiscomrades fully understood.A few days before the battle of Borodino, Nicholas received thenecessary money and warrants, and having sent some hussars on inadvance, he set out with post horses for Voronezh.Only a man who has experienced it--that is, has passed some monthscontinuously in an atmosphere of campaigning and war--can understand thedelight Nicholas felt when he escaped from the region covered by thearmy's foraging operations, provision trains, and hospitals. When--freefrom soldiers, wagons, and the filthy traces of a camp--he saw villageswith peasants and peasant women, gentlemen's country houses, fieldswhere cattle were grazing, posthouses with stationmasters asleep inthem, he rejoiced as though seeing all this for the first time. What fora long while specially surprised and delighted him were the women, youngand healthy, without a dozen officers making up to each of them; women,too, who were pleased and flattered that a passing officer should jokewith them.In the highest spirits Nicholas arrived at night at a hotel in Voronezh,ordered things he had long been deprived of in camp, and next day, veryclean-shaven and in a full-dress uniform he had not worn for a longtime, went to present himself to the authorities.The commander of the militia was a civilian general, an old man who wasevidently pleased with his military designation and rank. He receivedNicholas brusquely (imagining this to be characteristically military)and questioned him with an important air, as if considering the generalprogress of affairs and approving and disapproving with full right to doso. Nicholas was in such good spirits that this merely amused him.From the commander of the militia he drove to the governor. The governorwas a brisk little man, very simple and affable. He indicated the studfarms at which Nicholas might procure horses, recommended to him a horsedealer in the town and a landowner fourteen miles out of town who hadthe best horses, and promised to assist him in every way."You are Count Ilya Rostov's son? My wife was a great friend of yourmother's. We are at home on Thursdays--today is Thursday, so please comeand see us quite informally," said the governor, taking leave of him.Immediately on leaving the governor's, Nicholas hired post horses and,taking his squadron quartermaster with him, drove at a gallop to thelandowner, fourteen miles away, who had the stud. Everything seemed tohim pleasant and easy during that first part of his stay in Voronezhand, as usually happens when a man is in a pleasant state of mind,everything went well and easily.The landowner to whom Nicholas went was a bachelor, an old cavalryman, ahorse fancier, a sportsman, the possessor of some century-old brandy andsome old Hungarian wine, who had a snuggery where he smoked, and whoowned some splendid horses.In very few words Nicholas bought seventeen picked stallions for sixthousand rubles--to serve, as he said, as samples of his remounts. Afterdining and taking rather too much of the Hungarian wine, Nicholas--having exchanged kisses with the landowner, with whom he was already onthe friendliest terms--galloped back over abominable roads, in thebrightest frame of mind, continually urging on the driver so as to be intime for the governor's party.When he had changed, poured water over his head, and scented himself,Nicholas arrived at the governor's rather late, but with the phrase"better late than never" on his lips.It was not a ball, nor had dancing been announced, but everyone knewthat Catherine Petrovna would play valses and the ecossaise on theclavichord and that there would be dancing, and so everyone had come asto a ball.Provincial life in 1812 went on very much as usual, but with thisdifference, that it was livelier in the towns in consequence of thearrival of many wealthy families from Moscow, and as in everything thatwent on in Russia at that time a special recklessness was noticeable, an"in for a penny, in for a pound--who cares?" spirit, and the inevitablesmall talk, instead of turning on the weather and mutual acquaintances,now turned on Moscow, the army, and Napoleon.The society gathered together at the governor's was the best inVoronezh.There were a great many ladies and some of Nicholas' Moscowacquaintances, but there were no men who could at all vie with thecavalier of St. George, the hussar remount officer, the good-natured andwell-bred Count Rostov. Among the men was an Italian prisoner, anofficer of the French army; and Nicholas felt that the presence of thatprisoner enhanced his own importance as a Russian hero. The Italian was,as it were, a war trophy. Nicholas felt this, it seemed to him thateveryone regarded the Italian in the same light, and he treated himcordially though with dignity and restraint.As soon as Nicholas entered in his hussar uniform, diffusing around hima fragrance of perfume and wine, and had uttered the words "better latethan never" and heard them repeated several times by others, peopleclustered around him; all eyes turned on him, and he felt at once thathe had entered into his proper position in the province--that of auniversal favorite: a very pleasant position, and intoxicatingly soafter his long privations. At posting stations, at inns, and in thelandowner's snuggery, maidservants had been flattered by his notice, andhere too at the governor's party there were (as it seemed to Nicholas)an inexhaustible number of pretty young women, married and unmarried,impatiently awaiting his notice. The women and girls flirted with himand, from the first day, the people concerned themselves to get thisfine young daredevil of an hussar married and settled down. Among thesewas the governor's wife herself, who welcomed Rostov as a near relativeand called him "Nicholas."Catherine Petrovna did actually play valses and the ecossaise, anddancing began in which Nicholas still further captivated the provincialsociety by his agility. His particularly free manner of dancing evensurprised them all. Nicholas was himself rather surprised at the way hedanced that evening. He had never danced like that in Moscow and wouldeven have considered such a very free and easy manner improper and inbad form, but here he felt it incumbent on him to astonish them all bysomething unusual, something they would have to accept as the regularthing in the capital though new to them in the provinces.All the evening Nicholas paid attention to a blue-eyed, plump andpleasing little blonde, the wife of one of the provincial officials.With the naive conviction of young men in a merry mood that other men'swives were created for them, Rostov did not leave the lady's side andtreated her husband in a friendly and conspiratorial style, as if,without speaking of it, they knew how capitally Nicholas and the ladywould get on together. The husband, however, did not seem to share thatconviction and tried to behave morosely with Rostov. But the latter'sgood-natured naivete was so boundless that sometimes even heinvoluntarily yielded to Nicholas' good humor. Toward the end of theevening, however, as the wife's face grew more flushed and animated, thehusband's became more and more melancholy and solemn, as though therewere but a given amount of animation between them and as the wife'sshare increased the husband's diminished.CHAPTER VNicholas sat leaning slightly forward in an armchair, bending closelyover the blonde lady and paying her mythological compliments with asmile that never left his face. Jauntily shifting the position of hislegs in their tight riding breeches, diffusing an odor of perfume, andadmiring his partner, himself, and the fine outlines of his legs intheir well-fitting Hessian boots, Nicholas told the blonde lady that hewished to run away with a certain lady here in Voronezh."Which lady?""A charming lady, a divine one. Her eyes" (Nicholas looked at hispartner) "are blue, her mouth coral and ivory; her figure" (he glancedat her shoulders) "like Diana's...."The husband came up and sullenly asked his wife what she was talkingabout."Ah, Nikita Ivanych!" cried Nicholas, rising politely, and as if wishingNikita Ivanych to share his joke, he began to tell him of his intentionto elope with a blonde lady.The husband smiled gloomily, the wife gaily. The governor's good-naturedwife came up with a look of disapproval."Anna Ignatyevna wants to see you, Nicholas," said she, pronouncing thename so that Nicholas at once understood that Anna Ignatyevna was a veryimportant person. "Come, Nicholas! You know you let me call you so?""Oh, yes, Aunt. Who is she?""Anna Ignatyevna Malvintseva. She has heard from her niece how yourescued her... Can you guess?""I rescued such a lot of them!" said Nicholas."Her niece, Princess Bolkonskaya. She is here in Voronezh with her aunt.Oho! How you blush. Why, are...?""Not a bit! Please don't, Aunt!""Very well, very well!... Oh, what a fellow you are!"The governor's wife led him up to a tall and very stout old lady with ablue headdress, who had just finished her game of cards with the mostimportant personages of the town. This was Malvintseva, Princess Mary'saunt on her mother's side, a rich, childless widow who always lived inVoronezh. When Rostov approached her she was standing settling up forthe game. She looked at him and, screwing up her eyes sternly, continuedto upbraid the general who had won from her."Very pleased, mon cher," she then said, holding out her hand toNicholas. "Pray come and see me."After a few words about Princess Mary and her late father, whomMalvintseva had evidently not liked, and having asked what Nicholas knewof Prince Andrew, who also was evidently no favorite of hers, theimportant old lady dismissed Nicholas after repeating her invitation tocome to see her.Nicholas promised to come and blushed again as he bowed. At the mentionof Princess Mary he experienced a feeling of shyness and even of fear,which he himself did not understand.When he had parted from Malvintseva Nicholas wished to return to thedancing, but the governor's little wife placed her plump hand on hissleeve and, saying that she wanted to have a talk with him, led him toher sitting room, from which those who were there immediately withdrewso as not to be in her way."Do you know, dear boy," began the governor's wife with a seriousexpression on her kind little face, "that really would be the match foryou: would you like me to arrange it?""Whom do you mean, Aunt?" asked Nicholas."I will make a match for you with the princess. Catherine Petrovnaspeaks of Lily, but I say, no--the princess! Do you want me to do it? Iam sure your mother will be grateful to me. What a charming girl she is,really! And she is not at all so plain, either.""Not at all," replied Nicholas as if offended at the idea. "As befits asoldier, Aunt, I don't force myself on anyone or refuse anything," hesaid before he had time to consider what he was saying."Well then, remember, this is not a joke!""Of course not!""Yes, yes," the governor's wife said as if talking to herself. "But, mydear boy, among other things you are too attentive to the other, theblonde. One is sorry for the husband, really....""Oh no, we are good friends with him," said Nicholas in the simplicityof his heart; it did not enter his head that a pastime so pleasant tohimself might not be pleasant to someone else."But what nonsense I have been saying to the governor's wife!" thoughtNicholas suddenly at supper. "She will really begin to arrange amatch... and Sonya...?" And on taking leave of the governor's wife, whenshe again smilingly said to him, "Well then, remember!" he drew heraside."But see here, to tell the truth, Aunt...""What is it, my dear? Come, let's sit down here," said she.Nicholas suddenly felt a desire and need to tell his most intimatethoughts (which he would not have told to his mother, his sister, or hisfriend) to this woman who was almost a stranger. When he afterwardsrecalled that impulse to unsolicited and inexplicable frankness whichhad very important results for him, it seemed to him--as it seems toeveryone in such cases--that it was merely some silly whim that seizedhim: yet that burst of frankness, together with other trifling events,had immense consequences for him and for all his family."You see, Aunt, Mamma has long wanted me to marry an heiress, but thevery idea of marrying for money is repugnant to me.""Oh yes, I understand," said the governor's wife."But Princess Bolkonskaya--that's another matter. I will tell you thetruth. In the first place I like her very much, I feel drawn to her; andthen, after I met her under such circumstances--so strangely, the ideaoften occurred to me: 'This is fate.' Especially if you remember thatMamma had long been thinking of it; but I had never happened to meet herbefore, somehow it had always happened that we did not meet. And as longas my sister Natasha was engaged to her brother it was of course out ofthe question for me to think of marrying her. And it must needs happenthat I should meet her just when Natasha's engagement had been brokenoff... and then everything... So you see... I never told this to anyoneand never will, only to you."The governor's wife pressed his elbow gratefully."You know Sonya, my cousin? I love her, and promised to marry her, andwill do so.... So you see there can be no question about-" said Nicholasincoherently and blushing."My dear boy, what a way to look at it! You know Sonya has nothing andyou yourself say your Papa's affairs are in a very bad way. And whatabout your mother? It would kill her, that's one thing. And what sort oflife would it be for Sonya--if she's a girl with a heart? Your mother indespair, and you all ruined.... No, my dear, you and Sonya ought tounderstand that."Nicholas remained silent. It comforted him to hear these arguments."All the same, Aunt, it is impossible," he rejoined with a sigh, after ashort pause. "Besides, would the princess have me? And besides, she isnow in mourning. How can one think of it!""But you don't suppose I'm going to get you married at once? There isalways a right way of doing things," replied the governor's wife."What a matchmaker you are, Aunt..." said Nicholas, kissing her plumplittle hand.CHAPTER VIOn reaching Moscow after her meeting with Rostov, Princess Mary hadfound her nephew there with his tutor, and a letter from Prince Andrewgiving her instructions how to get to her Aunt Malvintseva at Voronezh.That feeling akin to temptation which had tormented her during herfather's illness, since his death, and especially since her meeting withRostov was smothered by arrangements for the journey, anxiety about herbrother, settling in a new house, meeting new people, and attending toher nephew's education. She was sad. Now, after a month passed in quietsurroundings, she felt more and more deeply the loss of her father whichwas associated in her mind with the ruin of Russia. She was agitated andincessantly tortured by the thought of the dangers to which her brother,the only intimate person now remaining to her, was exposed. She wasworried too about her nephew's education for which she had always feltherself incompetent, but in the depths of her soul she felt at peace--apeace arising from consciousness of having stifled those personal dreamsand hopes that had been on the point of awakening within her and wererelated to her meeting with Rostov.The day after her party the governor's wife came to see Malvintseva and,after discussing her plan with the aunt, remarked that though underpresent circumstances a formal betrothal was, of course, not to bethought of, all the same the young people might be brought together andcould get to know one another. Malvintseva expressed approval, and thegovernor's wife began to speak of Rostov in Mary's presence, praisinghim and telling how he had blushed when Princess Mary's name wasmentioned. But Princess Mary experienced a painful rather than a joyfulfeeling--her mental tranquillity was destroyed, and desires, doubts,self-reproach, and hopes reawoke.During the two days that elapsed before Rostov called, Princess Marycontinually thought of how she ought to behave to him. First she decidednot to come to the drawing room when he called to see her aunt--that itwould not be proper for her, in her deep mourning, to receive visitors;then she thought this would be rude after what he had done for her; thenit occurred to her that her aunt and the governor's wife had intentionsconcerning herself and Rostov--their looks and words at times seemed toconfirm this supposition--then she told herself that only she, with hersinful nature, could think this of them: they could not forget thatsituated as she was, while still wearing deep mourning, such matchmakingwould be an insult to her and to her father's memory. Assuming that shedid go down to see him, Princess Mary imagined the words he would say toher and what she would say to him, and these words sometimes seemedundeservedly cold and then to mean too much. More than anything shefeared lest the confusion she felt might overwhelm her and betray her assoon as she saw him.But when on Sunday after church the footman announced in the drawingroom that Count Rostov had called, the princess showed no confusion,only a slight blush suffused her cheeks and her eyes lit up with a newand radiant light."You have met him, Aunt?" said she in a calm voice, unable herself tounderstand that she could be outwardly so calm and natural.When Rostov entered the room, the princess dropped her eyes for aninstant, as if to give the visitor time to greet her aunt, and then justas Nicholas turned to her she raised her head and met his look withshining eyes. With a movement full of dignity and grace she half rosewith a smile of pleasure, held out her slender, delicate hand to him,and began to speak in a voice in which for the first time new deepwomanly notes vibrated. Mademoiselle Bourienne, who was in the drawingroom, looked at Princess Mary in bewildered surprise. Herself aconsummate coquette, she could not have maneuvered better on meeting aman she wished to attract."Either black is particularly becoming to her or she really has greatlyimproved without my having noticed it. And above all, what tact andgrace!" thought Mademoiselle Bourienne.Had Princess Mary been capable of reflection at that moment, she wouldhave been more surprised than Mademoiselle Bourienne at the change thathad taken place in herself. From the moment she recognized that dear,loved face, a new life force took possession of her and compelled her tospeak and act apart from her own will. From the time Rostov entered, herface became suddenly transformed. It was as if a light had been kindledin a carved and painted lantern and the intricate, skillful, artisticwork on its sides, that previously seemed dark, coarse, and meaningless,was suddenly shown up in unexpected and striking beauty. For the firsttime all that pure, spiritual, inward travail through which she hadlived appeared on the surface. All her inward labor, her dissatisfactionwith herself, her sufferings, her strivings after goodness, hermeekness, love, and self-sacrifice--all this now shone in those radianteyes, in her delicate smile, and in every trait of her gentle face.Rostov saw all this as clearly as if he had known her whole life. Hefelt that the being before him was quite different from, and betterthan, anyone he had met before, and above all better than himself.Their conversation was very simple and unimportant. They spoke of thewar, and like everyone else unconsciously exaggerated their sorrow aboutit; they spoke of their last meeting--Nicholas trying to change thesubject--they talked of the governor's kind wife, of Nicholas'relations, and of Princess Mary's.She did not talk about her brother, diverting the conversation as soonas her aunt mentioned Andrew. Evidently she could speak of Russia'smisfortunes with a certain artificiality, but her brother was too nearher heart and she neither could nor would speak lightly of him. Nicholasnoticed this, as he noticed every shade of Princess Mary's characterwith an observation unusual to him, and everything confirmed hisconviction that she was a quite unusual and extraordinary being.Nicholas blushed and was confused when people spoke to him about theprincess (as she did when he was mentioned) and even when he thought ofher, but in her presence he felt quite at ease, and said not at all whathe had prepared, but what, quite appropriately, occurred to him at themoment.When a pause occurred during his short visit, Nicholas, as is usual whenthere are children, turned to Prince Andrew's little son, caressing himand asking whether he would like to be an hussar. He took the boy on hisknee, played with him, and looked round at Princess Mary. With asoftened, happy, timid look she watched the boy she loved in the arms ofthe man she loved. Nicholas also noticed that look and, as ifunderstanding it, flushed with pleasure and began to kiss the boy withgood natured playfulness.As she was in mourning Princess Mary did not go out into society, andNicholas did not think it the proper thing to visit her again; but allthe same the governor's wife went on with her matchmaking, passing on toNicholas the flattering things Princess Mary said of him and vice versa,and insisting on his declaring himself to Princess Mary. For thispurpose she arranged a meeting between the young people at the bishop'shouse before Mass.Though Rostov told the governor's wife that he would not make anydeclaration to Princess Mary, he promised to go.As at Tilsit Rostov had not allowed himself to doubt that what everybodyconsidered right was right, so now, after a short but sincere strugglebetween his effort to arrange his life by his own sense of justice, andin obedient submission to circumstances, he chose the latter and yieldedto the power he felt irresistibly carrying him he knew not where. Heknew that after his promise to Sonya it would be what he deemed base todeclare his feelings to Princess Mary. And he knew that he would neveract basely. But he also knew (or rather felt at the bottom of his heart)that by resigning himself now to the force of circumstances and to thosewho were guiding him, he was not only doing nothing wrong, but was doingsomething very important--more important than anything he had ever donein his life.After meeting Princess Mary, though the course of his life went onexternally as before, all his former amusements lost their charm for himand he often thought about her. But he never thought about her as he hadthought of all the young ladies without exception whom he had met insociety, nor as he had for a long time, and at one time rapturously,thought about Sonya. He had pictured each of those young ladies asalmost all honest-hearted young men do, that is, as a possible wife,adapting her in his imagination to all the conditions of married life: awhite dressing gown, his wife at the tea table, his wife's carriage,little ones, Mamma and Papa, their relations to her, and so on--andthese pictures of the future had given him pleasure. But with PrincessMary, to whom they were trying to get him engaged, he could neverpicture anything of future married life. If he tried, his picturesseemed incongruous and false. It made him afraid.CHAPTER VIIThe dreadful news of the battle of Borodino, of our losses in killed andwounded, and the still more terrible news of the loss of Moscow reachedVoronezh in the middle of September. Princess Mary, having learned ofher brother's wound only from the Gazette and having no definite news ofhim, prepared (so Nicholas heard, he had not seen her again himself) toset off in search of Prince Andrew.When he received the news of the battle of Borodino and the abandonmentof Moscow, Rostov was not seized with despair, anger, the desire forvengeance, or any feeling of that kind, but everything in Voronezhsuddenly seemed to him dull and tiresome, and he experienced anindefinite feeling of shame and awkwardness. The conversations he heardseemed to him insincere; he did not know how to judge all these affairsand felt that only in the regiment would everything again become clearto him. He made haste to finish buying the horses, and often becameunreasonably angry with his servant and squadron quartermaster.A few days before his departure a special thanksgiving, at whichNicholas was present, was held in the cathedral for the Russian victory.He stood a little behind the governor and held himself with militarydecorum through the service, meditating on a great variety of subjects.When the service was over the governor's wife beckoned him to her."Have you seen the princess?" she asked, indicating with a movement ofher head a lady standing on the opposite side, beyond the choir.Nicholas immediately recognized Princess Mary not so much by the profilehe saw under her bonnet as by the feeling of solicitude, timidity, andpity that immediately overcame him. Princess Mary, evidently engrossedby her thoughts, was crossing herself for the last time before leavingthe church.Nicholas looked at her face with surprise. It was the same face he hadseen before, there was the same general expression of refined, inner,spiritual labor, but now it was quite differently lit up. There was apathetic expression of sorrow, prayer, and hope in it. As had occurredbefore when she was present, Nicholas went up to her without waiting tobe prompted by the governor's wife and not asking himself whether or notit was right and proper to address her here in church, and told her hehad heard of her trouble and sympathized with his whole soul. As soon asshe heard his voice a vivid glow kindled in her face, lighting up bothher sorrow and her joy."There is one thing I wanted to tell you, Princess," said Rostov. "It isthat if your brother, Prince Andrew Nikolievich, were not living, itwould have been at once announced in the Gazette, as he is a colonel."The princess looked at him, not grasping what he was saying, but cheeredby the expression of regretful sympathy on his face."And I have known so many cases of a splinter wound" (the Gazette saidit was a shell) "either proving fatal at once or being very slight,"continued Nicholas. "We must hope for the best, and I am sure..."Princess Mary interrupted him."Oh, that would be so dread..." she began and, prevented by agitationfrom finishing, she bent her head with a movement as graceful aseverything she did in his presence and, looking up at him gratefully,went out, following her aunt.That evening Nicholas did not go out, but stayed at home to settle someaccounts with the horse dealers. When he had finished that business itwas already too late to go anywhere but still too early to go to bed,and for a long time he paced up and down the room, reflecting on hislife, a thing he rarely did.Princess Mary had made an agreeable impression on him when he had mether in Smolensk province. His having encountered her in such exceptionalcircumstances, and his mother having at one time mentioned her to him asa good match, had drawn his particular attention to her. When he met heragain in Voronezh the impression she made on him was not merely pleasingbut powerful. Nicholas had been struck by the peculiar moral beauty heobserved in her at this time. He was, however, preparing to go away andit had not entered his head to regret that he was thus depriving himselfof chances of meeting her. But that day's encounter in church had, hefelt, sunk deeper than was desirable for his peace of mind. That pale,sad, refined face, that radiant look, those gentle graceful gestures,and especially the deep and tender sorrow expressed in all her featuresagitated him and evoked his sympathy. In men Rostov could not bear tosee the expression of a higher spiritual life (that was why he did notlike Prince Andrew) and he referred to it contemptuously as philosophyand dreaminess, but in Princess Mary that very sorrow which revealed thedepth of a whole spiritual world foreign to him was an irresistibleattraction."She must be a wonderful woman. A real angel!" he said to himself. "Whyam I not free? Why was I in such a hurry with Sonya?" And heinvoluntarily compared the two: the lack of spirituality in the one andthe abundance of it in the other--a spirituality he himself lacked andtherefore valued most highly. He tried to picture what would happen werehe free. How he would propose to her and how she would become his wife.But no, he could not imagine that. He felt awed, and no clear picturepresented itself to his mind. He had long ago pictured to himself afuture with Sonya, and that was all clear and simple just because it hadall been thought out and he knew all there was in Sonya, but it wasimpossible to picture a future with Princess Mary, because he did notunderstand her but simply loved her.Reveries about Sonya had had something merry and playful in them, but todream of Princess Mary was always difficult and a little frightening."How she prayed!" he thought. "It was plain that her whole soul was inher prayer. Yes, that was the prayer that moves mountains, and I am sureher prayer will be answered. Why don't I pray for what I want?" hesuddenly thought. "What do I want? To be free, released from Sonya...She was right," he thought, remembering what the governor's wife hadsaid: "Nothing but misfortune can come of marrying Sonya. Muddles, grieffor Mamma... business difficulties... muddles, terrible muddles!Besides, I don't love her--not as I should. O, God! release me from thisdreadful, inextricable position!" he suddenly began to pray. "Yes,prayer can move mountains, but one must have faith and not pray asNatasha and I used to as children, that the snow might turn into sugar--and then run out into the yard to see whether it had done so. No, but Iam not praying for trifles now," he thought as he put his pipe down in acorner, and folding his hands placed himself before the icon. Softenedby memories of Princess Mary he began to pray as he had not done for along time. Tears were in his eyes and in his throat when the door openedand Lavrushka came in with some papers."Blockhead! Why do you come in without being called?" cried Nicholas,quickly changing his attitude."From the governor," said Lavrushka in a sleepy voice. "A courier hasarrived and there's a letter for you.""Well, all right, thanks. You can go!"Nicholas took the two letters, one of which was from his mother and theother from Sonya. He recognized them by the handwriting and openedSonya's first. He had read only a few lines when he turned pale and hiseyes opened wide with fear and joy."No, it's not possible!" he cried aloud.Unable to sit still he paced up and down the room holding the letter andreading it. He glanced through it, then read it again, and then again,and standing still in the middle of the room he raised his shoulders,stretching out his hands, with his mouth wide open and his eyes fixed.What he had just been praying for with confidence that God would hearhim had come to pass; but Nicholas was as much astonished as if it weresomething extraordinary and unexpected, and as if the very fact that ithad happened so quickly proved that it had not come from God to whom hehad prayed, but by some ordinary coincidence.This unexpected and, as it seemed to Nicholas, quite voluntary letterfrom Sonya freed him from the knot that fettered him and from whichthere had seemed no escape. She wrote that the last unfortunate events--the loss of almost the whole of the Rostovs' Moscow property--and thecountess' repeatedly expressed wish that Nicholas should marry PrincessBolkonskaya, together with his silence and coldness of late, had allcombined to make her decide to release him from his promise and set himcompletely free.It would be too painful to me to think that I might be a cause of sorrowor discord in the family that has been so good to me (she wrote), and mylove has no aim but the happiness of those I love; so, Nicholas, I begyou to consider yourself free, and to be assured that, in spite ofeverything, no one can love you more than doesYour SonyaBoth letters were written from Troitsa. The other, from the countess,described their last days in Moscow, their departure, the fire, and thedestruction of all their property. In this letter the countess alsomentioned that Prince Andrew was among the wounded traveling with them;his state was very critical, but the doctor said there was now morehope. Sonya and Natasha were nursing him.Next day Nicholas took his mother's letter and went to see PrincessMary. Neither he nor she said a word about what "Natasha nursing him"might mean, but thanks to this letter Nicholas suddenly became almost asintimate with the princess as if they were relations.The following day he saw Princess Mary off on her journey to Yaroslavl,and a few days later left to rejoin his regiment.CHAPTER VIIISonya's letter written from Troitsa, which had come as an answer toNicholas' prayer, was prompted by this: the thought of getting Nicholasmarried to an heiress occupied the old countess' mind more and more. Sheknew that Sonya was the chief obstacle to this happening, and Sonya'slife in the countess' house had grown harder and harder, especiallyafter they had received a letter from Nicholas telling of his meetingwith Princess Mary in Bogucharovo. The countess let no occasion slip ofmaking humiliating or cruel allusions to Sonya.But a few days before they left Moscow, moved and excited by all thatwas going on, she called Sonya to her and, instead of reproaching andmaking demands on her, tearfully implored her to sacrifice herself andrepay all that the family had done for her by breaking off herengagement with Nicholas."I shall not be at peace till you promise me this."Sonya burst into hysterical tears and replied through her sobs that shewould do anything and was prepared for anything, but gave no actualpromise and could not bring herself to decide to do what was demanded ofher. She must sacrifice herself for the family that had reared andbrought her up. To sacrifice herself for others was Sonya's habit. Herposition in the house was such that only by sacrifice could she show herworth, and she was accustomed to this and loved doing it. But in all herformer acts of self-sacrifice she had been happily conscious that theyraised her in her own esteem and in that of others, and so made her moreworthy of Nicholas whom she loved more than anything in the world. Butnow they wanted her to sacrifice the very thing that constituted thewhole reward for her self-sacrifice and the whole meaning of her life.And for the first time she felt bitterness against those who had beenher benefactors only to torture her the more painfully; she felt jealousof Natasha who had never experienced anything of this sort, had neverneeded to sacrifice herself, but made others sacrifice themselves forher and yet was beloved by everybody. And for the first time Sonya feltthat out of her pure, quiet love for Nicholas a passionate feeling wasbeginning to grow up which was stronger than principle, virtue, orreligion. Under the influence of this feeling Sonya, whose life ofdependence had taught her involuntarily to be secretive, having answeredthe countess in vague general terms, avoided talking with her andresolved to wait till she should see Nicholas, not in order to set himfree but on the contrary at that meeting to bind him to her forever.The bustle and terror of the Rostovs' last days in Moscow stifled thegloomy thoughts that oppressed Sonya. She was glad to find escape fromthem in practical activity. But when she heard of Prince Andrew'spresence in their house, despite her sincere pity for him and forNatasha, she was seized by a joyful and superstitious feeling that Goddid not intend her to be separated from Nicholas. She knew that Natashaloved no one but Prince Andrew and had never ceased to love him. Sheknew that being thrown together again under such terrible circumstancesthey would again fall in love with one another, and that Nicholas wouldthen not be able to marry Princess Mary as they would be within theprohibited degrees of affinity. Despite all the terror of what hadhappened during those last days and during the first days of theirjourney, this feeling that Providence was intervening in her personalaffairs cheered Sonya.At the Troitsa monastery the Rostovs first broke their journey for awhole day.Three large rooms were assigned to them in the monastery hostelry, oneof which was occupied by Prince Andrew. The wounded man was much betterthat day and Natasha was sitting with him. In the next room sat thecount and countess respectfully conversing with the prior, who wascalling on them as old acquaintances and benefactors of the monastery.Sonya was there too, tormented by curiosity as to what Prince Andrew andNatasha were talking about. She heard the sound of their voices throughthe door. That door opened and Natasha came out, looking excited. Notnoticing the monk, who had risen to greet her and was drawing back thewide sleeve on his right arm, she went up to Sonya and took her hand."Natasha, what are you about? Come here!" said the countess.Natasha went up to the monk for his blessing, and he advised her to prayfor aid to God and His saint.As soon as the prior withdrew, Natasha took her friend by the hand andwent with her into the unoccupied room."Sonya, will he live?" she asked. "Sonya, how happy I am, and howunhappy!... Sonya, dovey, everything is as it used to be. If only helives! He cannot... because... because... of" and Natasha burst intotears."Yes! I knew it! Thank God!" murmured Sonya. "He will live."Sonya was not less agitated than her friend by the latter's fear andgrief and by her own personal feelings which she shared with no one.Sobbing, she kissed and comforted Natasha. "If only he lives!" shethought. Having wept, talked, and wiped away their tears, the twofriends went together to Prince Andrew's door. Natasha opened itcautiously and glanced into the room, Sonya standing beside her at thehalf-open door.Prince Andrew was lying raised high on three pillows. His pale face wascalm, his eyes closed, and they could see his regular breathing."O, Natasha!" Sonya suddenly almost screamed, catching her companion'sarm and stepping back from the door."What? What is it?" asked Natasha."It's that, that..." said Sonya, with a white face and trembling lips.Natasha softly closed the door and went with Sonya to the window, notyet understanding what the latter was telling her."You remember," said Sonya with a solemn and frightened expression. "Youremember when I looked in the mirror for you... at Otradnoe atChristmas? Do you remember what I saw?""Yes, yes!" cried Natasha opening her eyes wide, and vaguely recallingthat Sonya had told her something about Prince Andrew whom she had seenlying down."You remember?" Sonya went on. "I saw it then and told everybody, youand Dunyasha. I saw him lying on a bed," said she, making a gesture withher hand and a lifted finger at each detail, "and that he had his eyesclosed and was covered just with a pink quilt, and that his hands werefolded," she concluded, convincing herself that the details she had justseen were exactly what she had seen in the mirror.She had in fact seen nothing then but had mentioned the first thing thatcame into her head, but what she had invented then seemed to her now asreal as any other recollection. She not only remembered what she hadthen said--that he turned to look at her and smiled and was covered withsomething red--but was firmly convinced that she had then seen and saidthat he was covered with a pink quilt and that his eyes were closed."Yes, yes, it really was pink!" cried Natasha, who now thought she tooremembered the word pink being used, and saw in this the mostextraordinary and mysterious part of the prediction."But what does it mean?" she added meditatively."Oh, I don't know, it is all so strange," replied Sonya, clutching ather head.A few minutes later Prince Andrew rang and Natasha went to him, butSonya, feeling unusually excited and touched, remained at the windowthinking about the strangeness of what had occurred.They had an opportunity that day to send letters to the army, and thecountess was writing to her son."Sonya!" said the countess, raising her eyes from her letter as herniece passed, "Sonya, won't you write to Nicholas?" She spoke in a soft,tremulous voice, and in the weary eyes that looked over her spectaclesSonya read all that the countess meant to convey with these words. Thoseeyes expressed entreaty, shame at having to ask, fear of a refusal, andreadiness for relentless hatred in case of such refusal.Sonya went up to the countess and, kneeling down, kissed her hand."Yes, Mamma, I will write," said she.Sonya was softened, excited, and touched by all that had occurred thatday, especially by the mysterious fulfillment she had just seen of hervision. Now that she knew that the renewal of Natasha's relations withPrince Andrew would prevent Nicholas from marrying Princess Mary, shewas joyfully conscious of a return of that self-sacrificing spirit inwhich she was accustomed to live and loved to live. So with a joyfulconsciousness of performing a magnanimous deed--interrupted severaltimes by the tears that dimmed her velvety black eyes--she wrote thattouching letter the arrival of which had so amazed Nicholas.CHAPTER IXThe officer and soldiers who had arrested Pierre treated him withhostility but yet with respect, in the guardhouse to which he was taken.In their attitude toward him could still be felt both uncertainty as towho he might be--perhaps a very important person--and hostility as aresult of their recent personal conflict with him.But when the guard was relieved next morning, Pierre felt that for thenew guard--both officers and men--he was not as interesting as he hadbeen to his captors; and in fact the guard of the second day did notrecognize in this big, stout man in a peasant coat the vigorous personwho had fought so desperately with the marauder and the convoy and haduttered those solemn words about saving a child; they saw in him onlyNo. 17 of the captured Russians, arrested and detained for some reasonby order of the Higher Command. If they noticed anything remarkableabout Pierre, it was only his unabashed, meditative concentration andthoughtfulness, and the way he spoke French, which struck them assurprisingly good. In spite of this he was placed that day with theother arrested suspects, as the separate room he had occupied wasrequired by an officer.All the Russians confined with Pierre were men of the lowest class and,recognizing him as a gentleman, they all avoided him, more especially ashe spoke French. Pierre felt sad at hearing them making fun of him.That evening he learned that all these prisoners (he, probably, amongthem) were to be tried for incendiarism. On the third day he was takenwith the others to a house where a French general with a white mustachesat with two colonels and other Frenchmen with scarves on their arms.With the precision and definiteness customary in addressing prisoners,and which is supposed to preclude human frailty, Pierre like the otherswas questioned as to who he was, where he had been, with what object,and so on.These questions, like questions put at trials generally, left theessence of the matter aside, shut out the possibility of that essence'sbeing revealed, and were designed only to form a channel through whichthe judges wished the answers of the accused to flow so as to lead tothe desired result, namely a conviction. As soon as Pierre began to sayanything that did not fit in with that aim, the channel was removed andthe water could flow to waste. Pierre felt, moreover, what the accusedalways feel at their trial, perplexity as to why these questions wereput to him. He had a feeling that it was only out of condescension or akind of civility that this device of placing a channel was employed. Heknew he was in these men's power, that only by force had they broughthim there, that force alone gave them the right to demand answers totheir questions, and that the sole object of that assembly was toinculpate him. And so, as they had the power and wish to inculpate him,this expedient of an inquiry and trial seemed unnecessary. It wasevident that any answer would lead to conviction. When asked what he wasdoing when he was arrested, Pierre replied in a rather tragic mannerthat he was restoring to its parents a child he had saved from theflames. Why had he fought the marauder? Pierre answered that he "wasprotecting a woman," and that "to protect a woman who was being insultedwas the duty of every man; that..." They interrupted him, for this wasnot to the point. Why was he in the yard of a burning house wherewitnesses had seen him? He replied that he had gone out to see what washappening in Moscow. Again they interrupted him: they had not askedwhere he was going, but why he was found near the fire? Who was he? theyasked, repeating their first question, which he had declined to answer.Again he replied that he could not answer it."Put that down, that's bad... very bad," sternly remarked the generalwith the white mustache and red flushed face.On the fourth day fires broke out on the Zubovski rampart.Pierre and thirteen others were moved to the coach house of a merchant'shouse near the Crimean bridge. On his way through the streets Pierrefelt stifled by the smoke which seemed to hang over the whole city.Fires were visible on all sides. He did not then realize thesignificance of the burning of Moscow, and looked at the fires withhorror.He passed four days in the coach house near the Crimean bridge andduring that time learned, from the talk of the French soldiers, that allthose confined there were awaiting a decision which might come any dayfrom the marshal. What marshal this was, Pierre could not learn from thesoldiers. Evidently for them "the marshal" represented a very high andrather mysterious power.These first days, before the eighth of September when the prisoners werehad up for a second examination, were the hardest of all for Pierre.CHAPTER XOn the eighth of September an officer--a very important one judging bythe respect the guards showed him--entered the coach house where theprisoners were. This officer, probably someone on the staff, was holdinga paper in his hand, and called over all the Russians there, namingPierre as "the man who does not give his name." Glancing indolently andindifferently at all the prisoners, he ordered the officer in charge tohave them decently dressed and tidied up before taking them to themarshal. An hour later a squad of soldiers arrived and Pierre withthirteen others was led to the Virgin's Field. It was a fine day, sunnyafter rain, and the air was unusually pure. The smoke did not hang lowas on the day when Pierre had been taken from the guardhouse on theZubovski rampart, but rose through the pure air in columns. No flameswere seen, but columns of smoke rose on all sides, and all Moscow as faras Pierre could see was one vast charred ruin. On all sides there werewaste spaces with only stoves and chimney stacks still standing, andhere and there the blackened walls of some brick houses. Pierre gazed atthe ruins and did not recognize districts he had known well. Here andthere he could see churches that had not been burned. The Kremlin, whichwas not destroyed, gleamed white in the distance with its towers and thebelfry of Ivan the Great. The domes of the New Convent of the Virginglittered brightly and its bells were ringing particularly clearly.These bells reminded Pierre that it was Sunday and the feast of theNativity of the Virgin. But there seemed to be no one to celebrate thisholiday: everywhere were blackened ruins, and the few Russians to beseen were tattered and frightened people who tried to hide when they sawthe French.It was plain that the Russian nest was ruined and destroyed, but inplace of the Russian order of life that had been destroyed, Pierreunconsciously felt that a quite different, firm, French order had beenestablished over this ruined nest. He felt this in the looks of thesoldiers who, marching in regular ranks briskly and gaily, wereescorting him and the other criminals; he felt it in the looks of animportant French official in a carriage and pair driven by a soldier,whom they met on the way. He felt it in the merry sounds of regimentalmusic he heard from the left side of the field, and felt and realized itespecially from the list of prisoners the French officer had read outwhen he came that morning. Pierre had been taken by one set of soldiersand led first to one and then to another place with dozens of other men,and it seemed that they might have forgotten him, or confused him withthe others. But no: the answers he had given when questioned had comeback to him in his designation as "the man who does not give his name,"and under that appellation, which to Pierre seemed terrible, they werenow leading him somewhere with unhesitating assurance on their facesthat he and all the other prisoners were exactly the ones they wantedand that they were being taken to the proper place. Pierre felt himselfto be an insignificant chip fallen among the wheels of a machine whoseaction he did not understand but which was working well.He and the other prisoners were taken to the right side of the Virgin'sField, to a large white house with an immense garden not far from theconvent. This was Prince Shcherbitov's house, where Pierre had oftenbeen in other days, and which, as he learned from the talk of thesoldiers, was now occupied by the marshal, the Duke of Eckmuhl (Davout).They were taken to the entrance and led into the house one by one.Pierre was the sixth to enter. He was conducted through a glass gallery,an anteroom, and a hall, which were familiar to him, into a long lowstudy at the door of which stood an adjutant.Davout, spectacles on nose, sat bent over a table at the further end ofthe room. Pierre went close up to him, but Davout, evidently consultinga paper that lay before him, did not look up. Without raising his eyes,he said in a low voice:"Who are you?"Pierre was silent because he was incapable of uttering a word. To himDavout was not merely a French general, but a man notorious for hiscruelty. Looking at his cold face, as he sat like a stern schoolmasterwho was prepared to wait awhile for an answer, Pierre felt that everyinstant of delay might cost him his life; but he did not know what tosay. He did not venture to repeat what he had said at his firstexamination, yet to disclose his rank and position was dangerous andembarrassing. So he was silent. But before he had decided what to do,Davout raised his head, pushed his spectacles back on his forehead,screwed up his eyes, and looked intently at him."I know that man," he said in a cold, measured tone, evidentlycalculated to frighten Pierre.The chill that had been running down Pierre's back now seized his headas in a vise."You cannot know me, General, I have never seen you...""He is a Russian spy," Davout interrupted, addressing another generalwho was present, but whom Pierre had not noticed.Davout turned away. With an unexpected reverberation in his voice Pierrerapidly began:"No, monseigneur," he said, suddenly remembering that Davout was a duke."No, monseigneur, you cannot have known me. I am a militia officer andhave not quitted Moscow.""Your name?" asked Davout."Bezukhov.""What proof have I that you are not lying?""Monseigneur!" exclaimed Pierre, not in an offended but in a pleadingvoice.Davout looked up and gazed intently at him. For some seconds they lookedat one another, and that look saved Pierre. Apart from conditions of warand law, that look established human relations between the two men. Atthat moment an immense number of things passed dimly through both theirminds, and they realized that they were both children of humanity andwere brothers.At the first glance, when Davout had only raised his head from thepapers where human affairs and lives were indicated by numbers, Pierrewas merely a circumstance, and Davout could have shot him withoutburdening his conscience with an evil deed, but now he saw in him ahuman being. He reflected for a moment."How can you show me that you are telling the truth?" said Davoutcoldly.Pierre remembered Ramballe, and named him and his regiment and thestreet where the house was."You are not what you say," returned Davout.In a trembling, faltering voice Pierre began adducing proofs of thetruth of his statements.But at that moment an adjutant entered and reported something to Davout.Davout brightened up at the news the adjutant brought, and beganbuttoning up his uniform. It seemed that he had quite forgotten Pierre.When the adjutant reminded him of the prisoner, he jerked his head inPierre's direction with a frown and ordered him to be led away. Butwhere they were to take him Pierre did not know: back to the coach houseor to the place of execution his companions had pointed out to him asthey crossed the Virgin's Field.He turned his head and saw that the adjutant was putting anotherquestion to Davout."Yes, of course!" replied Davout, but what this "yes" meant, Pierre didnot know.Pierre could not afterwards remember how he went, whether it was far, orin which direction. His faculties were quite numbed, he was stupefied,and noticing nothing around him went on moving his legs as the othersdid till they all stopped and he stopped too. The only thought in hismind at that time was: who was it that had really sentenced him todeath? Not the men on the commission that had first examined him--notone of them wished to or, evidently, could have done it. It was notDavout, who had looked at him in so human a way. In another momentDavout would have realized that he was doing wrong, but just then theadjutant had come in and interrupted him. The adjutant, also, hadevidently had no evil intent though he might have refrained from comingin. Then who was executing him, killing him, depriving him of life--him,Pierre, with all his memories, aspirations, hopes, and thoughts? Who wasdoing this? And Pierre felt that it was no one.It was a system--a concurrence of circumstances.A system of some sort was killing him--Pierre--depriving him of life, ofeverything, annihilating him.CHAPTER XIFrom Prince Shcherbatov's house the prisoners were led straight down theVirgin's Field, to the left of the nunnery, as far as a kitchen gardenin which a post had been set up. Beyond that post a fresh pit had beendug in the ground, and near the post and the pit a large crowd stood ina semicircle. The crowd consisted of a few Russians and many ofNapoleon's soldiers who were not on duty--Germans, Italians, andFrenchmen, in a variety of uniforms. To the right and left of the poststood rows of French troops in blue uniforms with red epaulets and highboots and shakos.The prisoners were placed in a certain order, according to the list(Pierre was sixth), and were led to the post. Several drums suddenlybegan to beat on both sides of them, and at that sound Pierre felt as ifpart of his soul had been torn away. He lost the power of thinking orunderstanding. He could only hear and see. And he had only one wish--that the frightful thing that had to happen should happen quickly.Pierre looked round at his fellow prisoners and scrutinized them.The two first were convicts with shaven heads. One was tall and thin,the other dark, shaggy, and sinewy, with a flat nose. The third was adomestic serf, about forty-five years old, with grizzled hair and aplump, well-nourished body. The fourth was a peasant, a very handsomeman with a broad, light-brown beard and black eyes. The fifth was afactory hand, a thin, sallow-faced lad of eighteen in a loose coat.Pierre heard the French consulting whether to shoot them separately ortwo at a time. "In couples," replied the officer in command in a calmvoice. There was a stir in the ranks of the soldiers and it was evidentthat they were all hurrying--not as men hurry to do something theyunderstand, but as people hurry to finish a necessary but unpleasant andincomprehensible task.A French official wearing a scarf came up to the right of the row ofprisoners and read out the sentence in Russian and in French.Then two pairs of Frenchmen approached the criminals and at theofficer's command took the two convicts who stood first in the row. Theconvicts stopped when they reached the post and, while sacks were beingbrought, looked dumbly around as a wounded beast looks at an approachinghuntsman. One crossed himself continually, the other scratched his backand made a movement of the lips resembling a smile. With hurried handsthe soldiers blindfolded them, drawing the sacks over their heads, andbound them to the post.Twelve sharpshooters with muskets stepped out of the ranks with a firmregular tread and halted eight paces from the post. Pierre turned awayto avoid seeing what was going to happen. Suddenly a crackling, rollingnoise was heard which seemed to him louder than the most terrificthunder, and he looked round. There was some smoke, and the Frenchmenwere doing something near the pit, with pale faces and trembling hands.Two more prisoners were led up. In the same way and with similar looks,these two glanced vainly at the onlookers with only a silent appeal forprotection in their eyes, evidently unable to understand or believe whatwas going to happen to them. They could not believe it because theyalone knew what their life meant to them, and so they neither understoodnor believed that it could be taken from them.Again Pierre did not wish to look and again turned away; but again thesound as of a frightful explosion struck his ear, and at the same momenthe saw smoke, blood, and the pale, scared faces of the Frenchmen whowere again doing something by the post, their trembling hands impedingone another. Pierre, breathing heavily, looked around as if asking whatit meant. The same question was expressed in all the looks that met his.On the faces of all the Russians and of the French soldiers and officerswithout exception, he read the same dismay, horror, and conflict thatwere in his own heart. "But who, after all, is doing this? They are allsuffering as I am. Who then is it? Who?" flashed for an instant throughhis mind."Sharpshooters of the 86th, forward!" shouted someone. The fifthprisoner, the one next to Pierre, was led away--alone. Pierre did notunderstand that he was saved, that he and the rest had been broughtthere only to witness the execution. With ever-growing horror, and nosense of joy or relief, he gazed at what was taking place. The fifth manwas the factory lad in the loose cloak. The moment they laid hands onhim he sprang aside in terror and clutched at Pierre. (Pierre shudderedand shook himself free.) The lad was unable to walk. They dragged himalong, holding him up under the arms, and he screamed. When they got himto the post he grew quiet, as if he suddenly understood something.Whether he understood that screaming was useless or whether he thoughtit incredible that men should kill him, at any rate he took his stand atthe post, waiting to be blindfolded like the others, and like a woundedanimal looked around him with glittering eyes.Pierre was no longer able to turn away and close his eyes. His curiosityand agitation, like that of the whole crowd, reached the highest pitchat this fifth murder. Like the others this fifth man seemed calm; hewrapped his loose cloak closer and rubbed one bare foot with the other.When they began to blindfold him he himself adjusted the knot which hurtthe back of his head; then when they propped him against thebloodstained post, he leaned back and, not being comfortable in thatposition, straightened himself, adjusted his feet, and leaned back againmore comfortably. Pierre did not take his eyes from him and did not misshis slightest movement.Probably a word of command was given and was followed by the reports ofeight muskets; but try as he would Pierre could not afterwards rememberhaving heard the slightest sound of the shots. He only saw how theworkman suddenly sank down on the cords that held him, how blood showeditself in two places, how the ropes slackened under the weight of thehanging body, and how the workman sat down, his head hanging unnaturallyand one leg bent under him. Pierre ran up to the post. No one hinderedhim. Pale, frightened people were doing something around the workman.The lower jaw of an old Frenchman with a thick mustache trembled as heuntied the ropes. The body collapsed. The soldiers dragged it awkwardlyfrom the post and began pushing it into the pit.They all plainly and certainly knew that they were criminals who musthide the traces of their guilt as quickly as possible.Pierre glanced into the pit and saw that the factory lad was lying withhis knees close up to his head and one shoulder higher than the other.That shoulder rose and fell rhythmically and convulsively, but spadefulsof earth were already being thrown over the whole body. One of thesoldiers, evidently suffering, shouted gruffly and angrily at Pierre togo back. But Pierre did not understand him and remained near the post,and no one drove him away.When the pit had been filled up a command was given. Pierre was takenback to his place, and the rows of troops on both sides of the post madea half turn and went past it at a measured pace. The twenty-foursharpshooters with discharged muskets, standing in the center of thecircle, ran back to their places as the companies passed by.Pierre gazed now with dazed eyes at these sharpshooters who ran incouples out of the circle. All but one rejoined their companies. Thisone, a young soldier, his face deadly pale, his shako pushed back, andhis musket resting on the ground, still stood near the pit at the spotfrom which he had fired. He swayed like a drunken man, taking some stepsforward and back to save himself from falling. An old, noncommissionedofficer ran out of the ranks and taking him by the elbow dragged him tohis company. The crowd of Russians and Frenchmen began to disperse. Theyall went away silently and with drooping heads."That will teach them to start fires," said one of the Frenchmen.Pierre glanced round at the speaker and saw that it was a soldier whowas trying to find some relief after what had been done, but was notable to do so. Without finishing what he had begun to say he made ahopeless movement with his arm and went away.CHAPTER XIIAfter the execution Pierre was separated from the rest of the prisonersand placed alone in a small, ruined, and befouled church.Toward evening a noncommissioned officer entered with two soldiers andtold him that he had been pardoned and would now go to the barracks forthe prisoners of war. Without understanding what was said to him, Pierregot up and went with the soldiers. They took him to the upper end of thefield, where there were some sheds built of charred planks, beams, andbattens, and led him into one of them. In the darkness some twentydifferent men surrounded Pierre. He looked at them without understandingwho they were, why they were there, or what they wanted of him. He heardwhat they said, but did not understand the meaning of the words and madeno kind of deduction from or application of them. He replied toquestions they put to him, but did not consider who was listening to hisreplies, nor how they would understand them. He looked at their facesand figures, but they all seemed to him equally meaningless.From the moment Pierre had witnessed those terrible murders committed bymen who did not wish to commit them, it was as if the mainspring of hislife, on which everything depended and which made everything appearalive, had suddenly been wrenched out and everything had collapsed intoa heap of meaningless rubbish. Though he did not acknowledge it tohimself, his faith in the right ordering of the universe, in humanity,in his own soul, and in God, had been destroyed. He had experienced thisbefore, but never so strongly as now. When similar doubts had assailedhim before, they had been the result of his own wrongdoing, and at thebottom of his heart he had felt that relief from his despair and fromthose doubts was to be found within himself. But now he felt that theuniverse had crumbled before his eyes and only meaningless ruinsremained, and this not by any fault of his own. He felt that it was notin his power to regain faith in the meaning of life.Around him in the darkness men were standing and evidently somethingabout him interested them greatly. They were telling him something andasking him something. Then they led him away somewhere, and at last hefound himself in a corner of the shed among men who were laughing andtalking on all sides."Well, then, mates... that very prince who..." some voice at the otherend of the shed was saying, with a strong emphasis on the word who.Sitting silent and motionless on a heap of straw against the wall,Pierre sometimes opened and sometimes closed his eyes. But as soon as heclosed them he saw before him the dreadful face of the factory lad--especially dreadful because of its simplicity--and the faces of themurderers, even more dreadful because of their disquiet. And he openedhis eyes again and stared vacantly into the darkness around him.Beside him in a stooping position sat a small man of whose presence hewas first made aware by a strong smell of perspiration which came fromhim every time he moved. This man was doing something to his legs in thedarkness, and though Pierre could not see his face he felt that the mancontinually glanced at him. On growing used to the darkness Pierre sawthat the man was taking off his leg bands, and the way he did it arousedPierre's interest.Having unwound the string that tied the band on one leg, he carefullycoiled it up and immediately set to work on the other leg, glancing upat Pierre. While one hand hung up the first string the other was alreadyunwinding the band on the second leg. In this way, having carefullyremoved the leg bands by deft circular motions of his arm following oneanother uninterruptedly, the man hung the leg bands up on some pegsfixed above his head. Then he took out a knife, cut something, closedthe knife, placed it under the head of his bed, and, seating himselfcomfortably, clasped his arms round his lifted knees and fixed his eyeson Pierre. The latter was conscious of something pleasant, comforting,and well-rounded in these deft movements, in the man's well-orderedarrangements in his corner, and even in his very smell, and he looked atthe man without taking his eyes from him."You've seen a lot of trouble, sir, eh?" the little man suddenly said.And there was so much kindliness and simplicity in his singsong voicethat Pierre tried to reply, but his jaw trembled and he felt tearsrising to his eyes. The little fellow, giving Pierre no time to betrayhis confusion, instantly continued in the same pleasant tones:"Eh, lad, don't fret!" said he, in the tender singsong caressing voiceold Russian peasant women employ. "Don't fret, friend--'suffer an hour,live for an age!' that's how it is, my dear fellow. And here we live,thank heaven, without offense. Among these folk, too, there are good menas well as bad," said he, and still speaking, he turned on his kneeswith a supple movement, got up, coughed, and went off to another part ofthe shed."Eh, you rascal!" Pierre heard the same kind voice saying at the otherend of the shed. "So you've come, you rascal? She remembers... Now, now,that'll do!"And the soldier, pushing away a little dog that was jumping up at him,returned to his place and sat down. In his hands he had somethingwrapped in a rag."Here, eat a bit, sir," said he, resuming his former respectful tone ashe unwrapped and offered Pierre some baked potatoes. "We had soup fordinner and the potatoes are grand!"Pierre had not eaten all day and the smell of the potatoes seemedextremely pleasant to him. He thanked the soldier and began to eat."Well, are they all right?" said the soldier with a smile. "You shoulddo like this."He took a potato, drew out his clasp knife, cut the potato into twoequal halves on the palm of his hand, sprinkled some salt on it from therag, and handed it to Pierre."The potatoes are grand!" he said once more. "Eat some like that!"Pierre thought he had never eaten anything that tasted better."Oh, I'm all right," said he, "but why did they shoot those poorfellows? The last one was hardly twenty.""Tss, tt...!" said the little man. "Ah, what a sin... what a sin!" headded quickly, and as if his words were always waiting ready in hismouth and flew out involuntarily he went on: "How was it, sir, that youstayed in Moscow?""I didn't think they would come so soon. I stayed accidentally," repliedPierre."And how did they arrest you, dear lad? At your house?""No, I went to look at the fire, and they arrested me there, and triedme as an incendiary.""Where there's law there's injustice," put in the little man."And have you been here long?" Pierre asked as he munched the last ofthe potato."I? It was last Sunday they took me, out of a hospital in Moscow.""Why, are you a soldier then?""Yes, we are soldiers of the Apsheron regiment. I was dying of fever. Weweren't told anything. There were some twenty of us lying there. We hadno idea, never guessed at all.""And do you feel sad here?" Pierre inquired."How can one help it, lad? My name is Platon, and the surname isKarataev," he added, evidently wishing to make it easier for Pierre toaddress him. "They call me 'little falcon' in the regiment. How is oneto help feeling sad? Moscow--she's the mother of cities. How can one seeall this and not feel sad? But 'the maggot gnaws the cabbage, yet diesfirst'; that's what the old folks used to tell us," he added rapidly."What? What did you say?" asked Pierre."Who? I?" said Karataev. "I say things happen not as we plan but as Godjudges," he replied, thinking that he was repeating what he had saidbefore, and immediately continued:"Well, and you, have you a family estate, sir? And a house? So you haveabundance, then? And a housewife? And your old parents, are they stillliving?" he asked.And though it was too dark for Pierre to see, he felt that a suppressedsmile of kindliness puckered the soldier's lips as he put thesequestions. He seemed grieved that Pierre had no parents, especially thathe had no mother."A wife for counsel, a mother-in-law for welcome, but there's none asdear as one's own mother!" said he. "Well, and have you little ones?" hewent on asking.Again Pierre's negative answer seemed to distress him, and he hastenedto add:"Never mind! You're young folks yet, and please God may still have some.The great thing is to live in harmony....""But it's all the same now," Pierre could not help saying."Ah, my dear fellow!" rejoined Karataev, "never decline a prison or abeggar's sack!"He seated himself more comfortably and coughed, evidently preparing totell a long story."Well, my dear fellow, I was still living at home," he began. "We had awell-to-do homestead, plenty of land, we peasants lived well and ourhouse was one to thank God for. When Father and we went out mowing therewere seven of us. We lived well. We were real peasants. It sohappened..."And Platon Karataev told a long story of how he had gone into someone'scopse to take wood, how he had been caught by the keeper, had beentried, flogged, and sent to serve as a soldier."Well, lad," and a smile changed the tone of his voice "we thought itwas a misfortune but it turned out a blessing! If it had not been for mysin, my brother would have had to go as a soldier. But he, my youngerbrother, had five little ones, while I, you see, only left a wifebehind. We had a little girl, but God took her before I went as asoldier. I come home on leave and I'll tell you how it was, I look andsee that they are living better than before. The yard full of cattle,the women at home, two brothers away earning wages, and only Michael theyoungest, at home. Father, he says, 'All my children are the same to me:it hurts the same whichever finger gets bitten. But if Platon hadn'tbeen shaved for a soldier, Michael would have had to go.' called us allto him and, will you believe it, placed us in front of the icons.'Michael,' he says, 'come here and bow down to his feet; and you, youngwoman, you bow down too; and you, grandchildren, also bow down beforehim! Do you understand?' he says. That's how it is, dear fellow. Fatelooks for a head. But we are always judging, 'that's not well--that'snot right!' Our luck is like water in a dragnet: you pull at it and itbulges, but when you've drawn it out it's empty! That's how it is."And Platon shifted his seat on the straw.After a short silence he rose."Well, I think you must be sleepy," said he, and began rapidly crossinghimself and repeating:"Lord Jesus Christ, holy Saint Nicholas, Frola and Lavra! Lord JesusChrist, holy Saint Nicholas, Frola and Lavra! Lord Jesus Christ, havemercy on us and save us!" he concluded, then bowed to the ground, gotup, sighed, and sat down again on his heap of straw. "That's the way.Lay me down like a stone, O God, and raise me up like a loaf," hemuttered as he lay down, pulling his coat over him."What prayer was that you were saying?" asked Pierre."Eh?" murmured Platon, who had almost fallen asleep. "What was I saying?I was praying. Don't you pray?""Yes, I do," said Pierre. "But what was that you said: Frola and Lavra?""Well, of course," replied Platon quickly, "the horses' saints. One mustpity the animals too. Eh, the rascal! Now you've curled up and got warm,you daughter of a bitch!" said Karataev, touching the dog that lay athis feet, and again turning over he fell asleep immediately.Sounds of crying and screaming came from somewhere in the distanceoutside, and flames were visible through the cracks of the shed, butinside it was quiet and dark. For a long time Pierre did not sleep, butlay with eyes open in the darkness, listening to the regular snoring ofPlaton who lay beside him, and he felt that the world that had beenshattered was once more stirring in his soul with a new beauty and onnew and unshakable foundations.CHAPTER XIIITwenty-three soldiers, three officers, and two officials were confinedin the shed in which Pierre had been placed and where he remained forfour weeks.When Pierre remembered them afterwards they all seemed misty figures tohim except Platon Karataev, who always remained in his mind a most vividand precious memory and the personification of everything Russian,kindly, and round. When Pierre saw his neighbor next morning at dawn thefirst impression of him, as of something round, was fully confirmed:Platon's whole figure--in a French overcoat girdled with a cord, asoldier's cap, and bast shoes--was round. His head was quite round, hisback, chest, shoulders, and even his arms, which he held as if everready to embrace something, were rounded, his pleasant smile and hislarge, gentle brown eyes were also round.Platon Karataev must have been fifty, judging by his stories ofcampaigns he had been in, told as by an old soldier. He did not himselfknow his age and was quite unable to determine it. But his brilliantlywhite, strong teeth which showed in two unbroken semicircles when helaughed--as he often did--were all sound and good, there was not a grayhair in his beard or on his head, and his whole body gave an impressionof suppleness and especially of firmness and endurance.His face, despite its fine, rounded wrinkles, had an expression ofinnocence and youth, his voice was pleasant and musical. But the chiefpeculiarity of his speech was its directness and appositeness. It wasevident that he never considered what he had said or was going to say,and consequently the rapidity and justice of his intonation had anirresistible persuasiveness.His physical strength and agility during the first days of hisimprisonment were such that he seemed not to know what fatigue andsickness meant. Every night before lying down, he said: "Lord, lay medown as a stone and raise me up as a loaf!" and every morning on gettingup, he said: "I lay down and curled up, I get up and shake myself." Andindeed he only had to lie down, to fall asleep like a stone, and he onlyhad to shake himself, to be ready without a moment's delay for somework, just as children are ready to play directly they awake. He coulddo everything, not very well but not badly. He baked, cooked, sewed,planed, and mended boots. He was always busy, and only at night allowedhimself conversation--of which he was fond--and songs. He did not singlike a trained singer who knows he is listened to, but like the birds,evidently giving vent to the sounds in the same way that one stretchesoneself or walks about to get rid of stiffness, and the sounds werealways high-pitched, mournful, delicate, and almost feminine, and hisface at such times was very serious.Having been taken prisoner and allowed his beard to grow, he seemed tohave thrown off all that had been forced upon him--everything militaryand alien to himself--and had returned to his former peasant habits."A soldier on leave--a shirt outside breeches," he would say.He did not like talking about his life as a soldier, though he did notcomplain, and often mentioned that he had not been flogged once duringthe whole of his army service. When he related anything it was generallysome old and evidently precious memory of his "Christian" life, as hecalled his peasant existence. The proverbs, of which his talk was full,were for the most part not the coarse and indecent saws soldiers employ,but those folk sayings which taken without a context seem soinsignificant, but when used appositely suddenly acquire a significanceof profound wisdom.He would often say the exact opposite of what he had said on a previousoccasion, yet both would be right. He liked to talk and he talked well,adorning his speech with terms of endearment and with folk sayings whichPierre thought he invented himself, but the chief charm of his talk layin the fact that the commonest events--sometimes just such as Pierre hadwitnessed without taking notice of them--assumed in Karataev's acharacter of solemn fitness. He liked to hear the folk tales one of thesoldiers used to tell of an evening (they were always the same), butmost of all he liked to hear stories of real life. He would smilejoyfully when listening to such stories, now and then putting in a wordor asking a question to make the moral beauty of what he was told clearto himself. Karataev had no attachments, friendships, or love, as Pierreunderstood them, but loved and lived affectionately with everything lifebrought him in contact with, particularly with man--not any particularman, but those with whom he happened to be. He loved his dog, hiscomrades, the French, and Pierre who was his neighbor, but Pierre feltthat in spite of Karataev's affectionate tenderness for him (by which heunconsciously gave Pierre's spiritual life its due) he would not havegrieved for a moment at parting from him. And Pierre began to feel inthe same way toward Karataev.To all the other prisoners Platon Karataev seemed a most ordinarysoldier. They called him "little falcon" or "Platosha," chaffed himgood-naturedly, and sent him on errands. But to Pierre he alwaysremained what he had seemed that first night: an unfathomable, rounded,eternal personification of the spirit of simplicity and truth.Platon Karataev knew nothing by heart except his prayers. When he beganto speak he seemed not to know how he would conclude.Sometimes Pierre, struck by the meaning of his words, would ask him torepeat them, but Platon could never recall what he had said a momentbefore, just as he never could repeat to Pierre the words of hisfavorite song: native and birch tree and my heart is sick occurred init, but when spoken and not sung, no meaning could be got out of it. Hedid not, and could not, understand the meaning of words apart from theircontext. Every word and action of his was the manifestation of anactivity unknown to him, which was his life. But his life, as heregarded it, had no meaning as a separate thing. It had meaning only aspart of a whole of which he was always conscious. His words and actionsflowed from him as evenly, inevitably, and spontaneously as fragranceexhales from a flower. He could not understand the value or significanceof any word or deed taken separately.CHAPTER XIVWhen Princess Mary heard from Nicholas that her brother was with theRostovs at Yaroslavl she at once prepared to go there, in spite of heraunt's efforts to dissuade her--and not merely to go herself but to takeher nephew with her. Whether it were difficult or easy, possible orimpossible, she did not ask and did not want to know: it was her duty,not only to herself, to be near her brother who was perhaps dying, butto do everything possible to take his son to him, and so she prepared toset off. That she had not heard from Prince Andrew himself, PrincessMary attributed to his being too weak to write or to his considering thelong journey too hard and too dangerous for her and his son.In a few days Princess Mary was ready to start. Her equipages were thehuge family coach in which she had traveled to Voronezh, a semiopentrap, and a baggage cart. With her traveled Mademoiselle Bourienne,little Nicholas and his tutor, her old nurse, three maids, Tikhon, and ayoung footman and courier her aunt had sent to accompany her.The usual route through Moscow could not be thought of, and theroundabout way Princess Mary was obliged to take through Lipetsk,Ryazan, Vladimir, and Shuya was very long and, as post horses were noteverywhere obtainable, very difficult, and near Ryazan where the Frenchwere said to have shown themselves was even dangerous.During this difficult journey Mademoiselle Bourienne, Dessalles, andPrincess Mary's servants were astonished at her energy and firmness ofspirit. She went to bed later and rose earlier than any of them, and nodifficulties daunted her. Thanks to her activity and energy, whichinfected her fellow travelers, they approached Yaroslavl by the end ofthe second week.The last days of her stay in Voronezh had been the happiest of her life.Her love for Rostov no longer tormented or agitated her. It filled herwhole soul, had become an integral part of herself, and she no longerstruggled against it. Latterly she had become convinced that she lovedand was beloved, though she never said this definitely to herself inwords. She had become convinced of it at her last interview withNicholas, when he had come to tell her that her brother was with theRostovs. Not by a single word had Nicholas alluded to the fact thatPrince Andrew's relations with Natasha might, if he recovered, berenewed, but Princess Mary saw by his face that he knew and thought ofthis.Yet in spite of that, his relation to her--considerate, delicate, andloving--not only remained unchanged, but it sometimes seemed to PrincessMary that he was even glad that the family connection between themallowed him to express his friendship more freely. She knew that sheloved for the first and only time in her life and felt that she wasbeloved, and was happy in regard to it.But this happiness on one side of her spiritual nature did not preventher feeling grief for her brother with full force; on the contrary, thatspiritual tranquility on the one side made it the more possible for herto give full play to her feeling for her brother. That feeling was sostrong at the moment of leaving Voronezh that those who saw her off, asthey looked at her careworn, despairing face, felt sure she would fallill on the journey. But the very difficulties and preoccupations of thejourney, which she took so actively in hand, saved her for a while fromher grief and gave her strength.As always happens when traveling, Princess Mary thought only of thejourney itself, forgetting its object. But as she approached Yaroslavlthe thought of what might await her there--not after many days, but thatvery evening--again presented itself to her and her agitation increasedto its utmost limit.The courier who had been sent on in advance to find out where theRostovs were staying in Yaroslavl, and in what condition Prince Andrewwas, when he met the big coach just entering the town gates was appalledby the terrible pallor of the princess' face that looked out at him fromthe window."I have found out everything, your excellency: the Rostovs are stayingat the merchant Bronnikov's house, in the Square not far from here,right above the Volga," said the courier.Princess Mary looked at him with frightened inquiry, not understandingwhy he did not reply to what she chiefly wanted to know: how was herbrother? Mademoiselle Bourienne put that question for her."How is the prince?" she asked."His excellency is staying in the same house with them.""Then he is alive," thought Princess Mary, and asked in a low voice:"How is he?""The servants say he is still the same."What "still the same" might mean Princess Mary did not ask, but with anunnoticed glance at little seven-year-old Nicholas, who was sitting infront of her looking with pleasure at the town, she bowed her head anddid not raise it again till the heavy coach, rumbling, shaking andswaying, came to a stop. The carriage steps clattered as they were letdown.The carriage door was opened. On the left there was water--a greatriver--and on the right a porch. There were people at the entrance:servants, and a rosy girl with a large plait of black hair, smiling asit seemed to Princess Mary in an unpleasantly affected way. (This wasSonya.) Princess Mary ran up the steps. "This way, this way!" said thegirl, with the same artificial smile, and the princess found herself inthe hall facing an elderly woman of Oriental type, who came rapidly tomeet her with a look of emotion. This was the countess. She embracedPrincess Mary and kissed her."Mon enfant!" she muttered, "je vous aime et vous connais depuislongtemps." ** "My child! I love you and have known you a long time."Despite her excitement, Princess Mary realized that this was thecountess and that it was necessary to say something to her. Hardlyknowing how she did it, she contrived to utter a few polite phrases inFrench in the same tone as those that had been addressed to her, andasked: "How is he?""The doctor says that he is not in danger," said the countess, but asshe spoke she raised her eyes with a sigh, and her gesture conveyed acontradiction of her words."Where is he? Can I see him--can I?" asked the princess."One moment, Princess, one moment, my dear! Is this his son?" said thecountess, turning to little Nicholas who was coming in with Dessalles."There will be room for everybody, this is a big house. Oh, what alovely boy!"The countess took Princess Mary into the drawing room, where Sonya wastalking to Mademoiselle Bourienne. The countess caressed the boy, andthe old count came in and welcomed the princess. He had changed verymuch since Princess Mary had last seen him. Then he had been a brisk,cheerful, self-assured old man; now he seemed a pitiful, bewilderedperson. While talking to Princess Mary he continually looked round as ifasking everyone whether he was doing the right thing. After thedestruction of Moscow and of his property, thrown out of his accustomedgroove he seemed to have lost the sense of his own significance and tofeel that there was no longer a place for him in life.In spite of her one desire to see her brother as soon as possible, andher vexation that at the moment when all she wanted was to see him theyshould be trying to entertain her and pretending to admire her nephew,the princess noticed all that was going on around her and felt thenecessity of submitting, for a time, to this new order of things whichshe had entered. She knew it to be necessary, and though it was hard forher she was not vexed with these people."This is my niece," said the count, introducing Sonya--"You don't knowher, Princess?"Princess Mary turned to Sonya and, trying to stifle the hostile feelingthat arose in her toward the girl, she kissed her. But she feltoppressed by the fact that the mood of everyone around her was so farfrom what was in her own heart."Where is he?" she asked again, addressing them all."He is downstairs. Natasha is with him," answered Sonya, flushing. "Wehave sent to ask. I think you must be tired, Princess."Tears of vexation showed themselves in Princess Mary's eyes. She turnedaway and was about to ask the countess again how to go to him, whenlight, impetuous, and seemingly buoyant steps were heard at the door.The princess looked round and saw Natasha coming in, almost running--that Natasha whom she had liked so little at their meeting in Moscowlong since.But hardly had the princess looked at Natasha's face before she realizedthat here was a real comrade in her grief, and consequently a friend.She ran to meet her, embraced her, and began to cry on her shoulder.As soon as Natasha, sitting at the head of Prince Andrew's bed, heard ofPrincess Mary's arrival, she softly left his room and hastened to herwith those swift steps that had sounded buoyant to Princess Mary.There was only one expression on her agitated face when she ran into thedrawing room--that of love--boundless love for him, for her, and for allthat was near to the man she loved; and of pity, suffering for others,and passionate desire to give herself entirely to helping them. It wasplain that at that moment there was in Natasha's heart no thought ofherself or of her own relations with Prince Andrew.Princess Mary, with her acute sensibility, understood all this at thefirst glance at Natasha's face, and wept on her shoulder with sorrowfulpleasure."Come, come to him, Mary," said Natasha, leading her into the otherroom.Princess Mary raised her head, dried her eyes, and turned to Natasha.She felt that from her she would be able to understand and learneverything."How..." she began her question but stopped short.She felt that it was impossible to ask, or to answer, in words.Natasha's face and eyes would have to tell her all more clearly andprofoundly.Natasha was gazing at her, but seemed afraid and in doubt whether to sayall she knew or not; she seemed to feel that before those luminous eyeswhich penetrated into the very depths of her heart, it was impossiblenot to tell the whole truth which she saw. And suddenly, Natasha's lipstwitched, ugly wrinkles gathered round her mouth, and covering her facewith her hands she burst into sobs.Princess Mary understood.But she still hoped, and asked, in words she herself did not trust:"But how is his wound? What is his general condition?""You, you... will see," was all Natasha could say.They sat a little while downstairs near his room till they had left offcrying and were able to go to him with calm faces."How has his whole illness gone? Is it long since he grew worse? Whendid this happen?" Princess Mary inquired.Natasha told her that at first there had been danger from his feverishcondition and the pain he suffered, but at Troitsa that had passed andthe doctor had only been afraid of gangrene. That danger had alsopassed. When they reached Yaroslavl the wound had begun to fester(Natasha knew all about such things as festering) and the doctor hadsaid that the festering might take a normal course. Then fever set in,but the doctor had said the fever was not very serious."But two days ago this suddenly happened," said Natasha, struggling withher sobs. "I don't know why, but you will see what he is like.""Is he weaker? Thinner?" asked the princess."No, it's not that, but worse. You will see. O, Mary, he is too good, hecannot, cannot live, because..."CHAPTER XVWhen Natasha opened Prince Andrew's door with a familiar movement andlet Princess Mary pass into the room before her, the princess felt thesobs in her throat. Hard as she had tried to prepare herself, and nowtried to remain tranquil, she knew that she would be unable to look athim without tears.The princess understood what Natasha had meant by the words: "two daysago this suddenly happened." She understood those words to mean that hehad suddenly softened and that this softening and gentleness were signsof approaching death. As she stepped to the door she already saw inimagination Andrew's face as she remembered it in childhood, a gentle,mild, sympathetic face which he had rarely shown, and which thereforeaffected her very strongly. She was sure he would speak soft, tenderwords to her such as her father had uttered before his death, and thatshe would not be able to bear it and would burst into sobs in hispresence. Yet sooner or later it had to be, and she went in. The sobsrose higher and higher in her throat as she more and more clearlydistinguished his form and her shortsighted eyes tried to make out hisfeatures, and then she saw his face and met his gaze.He was lying in a squirrel-fur dressing gown on a divan, surrounded bypillows. He was thin and pale. In one thin, translucently white hand heheld a handkerchief, while with the other he stroked the delicatemustache he had grown, moving his fingers slowly. His eyes gazed at themas they entered.On seeing his face and meeting his eyes Princess Mary's pace suddenlyslackened, she felt her tears dry up and her sobs ceased. She suddenlyfelt guilty and grew timid on catching the expression of his face andeyes."But in what am I to blame?" she asked herself. And his cold, stern lookreplied: "Because you are alive and thinking of the living, while I..."In the deep gaze that seemed to look not outwards but inwards there wasan almost hostile expression as he slowly regarded his sister andNatasha.He kissed his sister, holding her hand in his as was their wont."How are you, Mary? How did you manage to get here?" said he in a voiceas calm and aloof as his look.Had he screamed in agony, that scream would not have struck such horrorinto Princess Mary's heart as the tone of his voice."And have you brought little Nicholas?" he asked in the same slow, quietmanner and with an obvious effort to remember."How are you now?" said Princess Mary, herself surprised at what she wassaying."That, my dear, you must ask the doctor," he replied, and again makingan evident effort to be affectionate, he said with his lips only (hiswords clearly did not correspond to his thoughts):"Merci, chere amie, d'etre venue." ** "Thank you for coming, my dear."Princess Mary pressed his hand. The pressure made him wince justperceptibly. He was silent, and she did not know what to say. She nowunderstood what had happened to him two days before. In his words, histone, and especially in that calm, almost antagonistic look could befelt an estrangement from everything belonging to this world, terriblein one who is alive. Evidently only with an effort did he understandanything living; but it was obvious that he failed to understand, notbecause he lacked the power to do so but because he understood somethingelse--something the living did not and could not understand--and whichwholly occupied his mind."There, you see how strangely fate has brought us together," said he,breaking the silence and pointing to Natasha. "She looks after me allthe time."Princess Mary heard him and did not understand how he could say such athing. He, the sensitive, tender Prince Andrew, how could he say that,before her whom he loved and who loved him? Had he expected to live hecould not have said those words in that offensively cold tone. If he hadnot known that he was dying, how could he have failed to pity her andhow could he speak like that in her presence? The only explanation wasthat he was indifferent, because something else, much more important,had been revealed to him.The conversation was cold and disconnected and continually broke off."Mary came by way of Ryazan," said Natasha.Prince Andrew did not notice that she called his sister Mary, and onlyafter calling her so in his presence did Natasha notice it herself."Really?" he asked."They told her that all Moscow has been burned down, and that..."Natasha stopped. It was impossible to talk. It was plain that he wasmaking an effort to listen, but could not do so."Yes, they say it's burned," he said. "It's a great pity," and he gazedstraight before him, absently stroking his mustache with his fingers."And so you have met Count Nicholas, Mary?" Prince Andrew suddenly said,evidently wishing to speak pleasantly to them. "He wrote here that hetook a great liking to you," he went on simply and calmly, evidentlyunable to understand all the complex significance his words had forliving people. "If you liked him too, it would be a good thing for youto get married," he added rather more quickly, as if pleased at havingfound words he had long been seeking.Princess Mary heard his words but they had no meaning for her, except asa proof of how far away he now was from everything living."Why talk of me?" she said quietly and glanced at Natasha.Natasha, who felt her glance, did not look at her. All three were againsilent."Andrew, would you like..." Princess Mary suddenly said in a tremblingvoice, "would you like to see little Nicholas? He is always talkingabout you!"Prince Andrew smiled just perceptibly and for the first time, butPrincess Mary, who knew his face so well, saw with horror that he didnot smile with pleasure or affection for his son, but with quiet, gentleirony because he thought she was trying what she believed to be the lastmeans of arousing him."Yes, I shall be very glad to see him. Is he quite well?"When little Nicholas was brought into Prince Andrew's room he looked athis father with frightened eyes, but did not cry, because no one elsewas crying. Prince Andrew kissed him and evidently did not know what tosay to him.When Nicholas had been led away, Princess Mary again went up to herbrother, kissed him, and unable to restrain her tears any longer beganto cry.He looked at her attentively."Is it about Nicholas?" he asked.Princess Mary nodded her head, weeping."Mary, you know the Gosp..." but he broke off."What did you say?""Nothing. You mustn't cry here," he said, looking at her with the samecold expression.When Princess Mary began to cry, he understood that she was crying atthe thought that little Nicholas would be left without a father. With agreat effort he tried to return to life and to see things from theirpoint of view."Yes, to them it must seem sad!" he thought. "But how simple it is."The fowls of the air sow not, neither do they reap, yet your Fatherfeedeth them," he said to himself and wished to say to Princess Mary;"but no, they will take it their own way, they won't understand! Theycan't understand that all those feelings they prize so--all ourfeelings, all those ideas that seem so important to us, are unnecessary.We cannot understand one another," and he remained silent.Prince Andrew's little son was seven. He could scarcely read, and knewnothing. After that day he lived through many things, gaining knowledge,observation, and experience, but had he possessed all the faculties heafterwards acquired, he could not have had a better or more profoundunderstanding of the meaning of the scene he had witnessed between hisfather, Mary, and Natasha, than he had then. He understood itcompletely, and, leaving the room without crying, went silently up toNatasha who had come out with him and looked shyly at her with hisbeautiful, thoughtful eyes, then his uplifted, rosy upper lip trembledand leaning his head against her he began to cry.After that he avoided Dessalles and the countess who caressed him andeither sat alone or came timidly to Princess Mary, or to Natasha of whomhe seemed even fonder than of his aunt, and clung to them quietly andshyly.When Princess Mary had left Prince Andrew she fully understood whatNatasha's face had told her. She did not speak any more to Natasha ofhopes of saving his life. She took turns with her beside his sofa, anddid not cry any more, but prayed continually, turning in soul to thatEternal and Unfathomable, whose presence above the dying man was now soevident.CHAPTER XVINot only did Prince Andrew know he would die, but he felt that he wasdying and was already half dead. He was conscious of an aloofness fromeverything earthly and a strange and joyous lightness of existence.Without haste or agitation he awaited what was coming. That inexorable,eternal, distant, and unknown the presence of which he had feltcontinually all his life--was now near to him and, by the strangelightness he experienced, almost comprehensible and palpable...Formerly he had feared the end. He had twice experienced that terriblytormenting fear of death--the end--but now he no longer understood thatfear.He had felt it for the first time when the shell spun like a top beforehim, and he looked at the fallow field, the bushes, and the sky, andknew that he was face to face with death. When he came to himself afterbeing wounded and the flower of eternal, unfettered love had instantlyunfolded itself in his soul as if freed from the bondage of life thathad restrained it, he no longer feared death and ceased to think aboutit.During the hours of solitude, suffering, and partial delirium he spentafter he was wounded, the more deeply he penetrated into the newprinciple of eternal love revealed to him, the more he unconsciouslydetached himself from earthly life. To love everything and everybody andalways to sacrifice oneself for love meant not to love anyone, not tolive this earthly life. And the more imbued he became with thatprinciple of love, the more he renounced life and the more completely hedestroyed that dreadful barrier which--in the absence of such love--stands between life and death. When during those first days heremembered that he would have to die, he said to himself: "Well, what ofit? So much the better!"But after the night in Mytishchi when, half delirious, he had seen herfor whom he longed appear before him and, having pressed her hand to hislips, had shed gentle, happy tears, love for a particular woman againcrept unobserved into his heart and once more bound him to life. Andjoyful and agitating thoughts began to occupy his mind. Recalling themoment at the ambulance station when he had seen Kuragin, he could notnow regain the feeling he then had, but was tormented by the questionwhether Kuragin was alive. And he dared not inquire.His illness pursued its normal physical course, but what Natashareferred to when she said: "This suddenly happened," had occurred twodays before Princess Mary arrived. It was the last spiritual strugglebetween life and death, in which death gained the victory. It was theunexpected realization of the fact that he still valued life aspresented to him in the form of his love for Natasha, and a last, thoughultimately vanquished, attack of terror before the unknown.It was evening. As usual after dinner he was slightly feverish, and histhoughts were preternaturally clear. Sonya was sitting by the table. Hebegan to doze. Suddenly a feeling of happiness seized him."Ah, she has come!" thought he.And so it was: in Sonya's place sat Natasha who had just come innoiselessly.Since she had begun looking after him, he had always experienced thisphysical consciousness of her nearness. She was sitting in an armchairplaced sideways, screening the light of the candle from him, and wasknitting a stocking. She had learned to knit stockings since PrinceAndrew had casually mentioned that no one nursed the sick so well as oldnurses who knit stockings, and that there is something soothing in theknitting of stockings. The needles clicked lightly in her slender,rapidly moving hands, and he could clearly see the thoughtful profile ofher drooping face. She moved, and the ball rolled off her knees. Shestarted, glanced round at him, and screening the candle with her handstooped carefully with a supple and exact movement, picked up the ball,and regained her former position.He looked at her without moving and saw that she wanted to draw a deepbreath after stooping, but refrained from doing so and breathedcautiously.At the Troitsa monastery they had spoken of the past, and he had toldher that if he lived he would always thank God for his wound which hadbrought them together again, but after that they never spoke of thefuture."Can it or can it not be?" he now thought as he looked at her andlistened to the light click of the steel needles. "Can fate have broughtme to her so strangely only for me to die?... Is it possible that thetruth of life has been revealed to me only to show me that I have spentmy life in falsity? I love her more than anything in the world! But whatam I to do if I love her?" he thought, and he involuntarily groaned,from a habit acquired during his sufferings.On hearing that sound Natasha put down the stocking, leaned nearer tohim, and suddenly, noticing his shining eyes, stepped lightly up to himand bent over him."You are not asleep?""No, I have been looking at you a long time. I felt you come in. No oneelse gives me that sense of soft tranquillity that you do... that light.I want to weep for joy."Natasha drew closer to him. Her face shone with rapturous joy."Natasha, I love you too much! More than anything in the world.""And I!"--She turned away for an instant. "Why too much?" she asked."Why too much?... Well, what do you, what do you feel in your soul, yourwhole soul--shall I live? What do you think?""I am sure of it, sure!" Natasha almost shouted, taking hold of both hishands with a passionate movement.He remained silent awhile."How good it would be!" and taking her hand he kissed it.Natasha felt happy and agitated, but at once remembered that this wouldnot do and that he had to be quiet."But you have not slept," she said, repressing her joy. "Try to sleep...please!"He pressed her hand and released it, and she went back to the candle andsat down again in her former position. Twice she turned and looked athim, and her eyes met his beaming at her. She set herself a task on herstocking and resolved not to turn round till it was finished.Soon he really shut his eyes and fell asleep. He did not sleep long andsuddenly awoke with a start and in a cold perspiration.As he fell asleep he had still been thinking of the subject that nowalways occupied his mind--about life and death, and chiefly about death.He felt himself nearer to it."Love? What is love?" he thought."Love hinders death. Love is life. All, everything that I understand, Iunderstand only because I love. Everything is, everything exists, onlybecause I love. Everything is united by it alone. Love is God, and todie means that I, a particle of love, shall return to the general andeternal source." These thoughts seemed to him comforting. But they wereonly thoughts. Something was lacking in them, they were not clear, theywere too one-sidedly personal and brain-spun. And there was the formeragitation and obscurity. He fell asleep.He dreamed that he was lying in the room he really was in, but that hewas quite well and unwounded. Many various, indifferent, andinsignificant people appeared before him. He talked to them anddiscussed something trivial. They were preparing to go away somewhere.Prince Andrew dimly realized that all this was trivial and that he hadmore important cares, but he continued to speak, surprising them byempty witticisms. Gradually, unnoticed, all these persons began todisappear and a single question, that of the closed door, superseded allelse. He rose and went to the door to bolt and lock it. Everythingdepended on whether he was, or was not, in time to lock it. He went, andtried to hurry, but his legs refused to move and he knew he would not bein time to lock the door though he painfully strained all his powers. Hewas seized by an agonizing fear. And that fear was the fear of death. Itstood behind the door. But just when he was clumsily creeping toward thedoor, that dreadful something on the other side was already pressingagainst it and forcing its way in. Something not human--death--wasbreaking in through that door, and had to be kept out. He seized thedoor, making a final effort to hold it back--to lock it was no longerpossible--but his efforts were weak and clumsy and the door, pushed frombehind by that terror, opened and closed again.Once again it pushed from outside. His last superhuman efforts were vainand both halves of the door noiselessly opened. It entered, and it wasdeath, and Prince Andrew died.But at the instant he died, Prince Andrew remembered that he was asleep,and at the very instant he died, having made an effort, he awoke."Yes, it was death! I died--and woke up. Yes, death is an awakening!"And all at once it grew light in his soul and the veil that had tillthen concealed the unknown was lifted from his spiritual vision. He feltas if powers till then confined within him had been liberated, and thatstrange lightness did not again leave him.When, waking in a cold perspiration, he moved on the divan, Natasha wentup and asked him what was the matter. He did not answer and looked ather strangely, not understanding.That was what had happened to him two days before Princess Mary'sarrival. From that day, as the doctor expressed it, the wasting feverassumed a malignant character, but what the doctor said did not interestNatasha, she saw the terrible moral symptoms which to her were moreconvincing.From that day an awakening from life came to Prince Andrew together withhis awakening from sleep. And compared to the duration of life it didnot seem to him slower than an awakening from sleep compared to theduration of a dream.There was nothing terrible or violent in this comparatively slowawakening.His last days and hours passed in an ordinary and simple way. BothPrincess Mary and Natasha, who did not leave him, felt this. They didnot weep or shudder and during these last days they themselves felt thatthey were not attending on him (he was no longer there, he had leftthem) but on what reminded them most closely of him--his body. Both feltthis so strongly that the outward and terrible side of death did notaffect them and they did not feel it necessary to foment their grief.Neither in his presence nor out of it did they weep, nor did they evertalk to one another about him. They felt that they could not express inwords what they understood.They both saw that he was sinking slowly and quietly, deeper and deeper,away from them, and they both knew that this had to be so and that itwas right.He confessed, and received communion: everyone came to take leave ofhim. When they brought his son to him, he pressed his lips to the boy'sand turned away, not because he felt it hard and sad (Princess Mary andNatasha understood that) but simply because he thought it was all thatwas required of him, but when they told him to bless the boy, he didwhat was demanded and looked round as if asking whether there wasanything else he should do.When the last convulsions of the body, which the spirit was leaving,occurred, Princess Mary and Natasha were present."Is it over?" said Princess Mary when his body had for a few minuteslain motionless, growing cold before them. Natasha went up, looked atthe dead eyes, and hastened to close them. She closed them but did notkiss them, but clung to that which reminded her most nearly of him--hisbody."Where has he gone? Where is he now?..."When the body, washed and dressed, lay in the coffin on a table,everyone came to take leave of him and they all wept.Little Nicholas cried because his heart was rent by painful perplexity.The countess and Sonya cried from pity for Natasha and because he was nomore. The old count cried because he felt that before long, he, too,must take the same terrible step.Natasha and Princess Mary also wept now, but not because of their ownpersonal grief; they wept with a reverent and softening emotion whichhad taken possession of their souls at the consciousness of the simpleand solemn mystery of death that had been accomplished in theirpresence.BOOK THIRTEEN: 1812CHAPTER IMan's mind cannot grasp the causes of events in their completeness, butthe desire to find those causes is implanted in man's soul. And withoutconsidering the multiplicity and complexity of the conditions any one ofwhich taken separately may seem to be the cause, he snatches at thefirst approximation to a cause that seems to him intelligible and says:"This is the cause!" In historical events (where the actions of men arethe subject of observation) the first and most primitive approximationto present itself was the will of the gods and, after that, the will ofthose who stood in the most prominent position--the heroes of history.But we need only penetrate to the essence of any historic event--whichlies in the activity of the general mass of men who take part in it--tobe convinced that the will of the historic hero does not control theactions of the mass but is itself continually controlled. It may seem tobe a matter of indifference whether we understand the meaning ofhistorical events this way or that; yet there is the same differencebetween a man who says that the people of the West moved on the Eastbecause Napoleon wished it and a man who says that this happened becauseit had to happen, as there is between those who declared that the earthwas stationary and that the planets moved round it and those whoadmitted that they did not know what upheld the earth, but knew therewere laws directing its movement and that of the other planets. Thereis, and can be, no cause of an historical event except the one cause ofall causes. But there are laws directing events, and some of these lawsare known to us while we are conscious of others we cannot comprehend.The discovery of these laws is only possible when we have quiteabandoned the attempt to find the cause in the will of some one man,just as the discovery of the laws of the motion of the planets waspossible only when men abandoned the conception of the fixity of theearth.The historians consider that, next to the battle of Borodino and theoccupation of Moscow by the enemy and its destruction by fire, the mostimportant episode of the war of 1812 was the movement of the Russianarmy from the Ryazana to the Kaluga road and to the Tarutino camp--theso-called flank march across the Krasnaya Pakhra River. They ascribe theglory of that achievement of genius to different men and dispute as towhom the honor is due. Even foreign historians, including the French,acknowledge the genius of the Russian commanders when they speak of thatflank march. But it is hard to understand why military writers, andfollowing them others, consider this flank march to be the profoundconception of some one man who saved Russia and destroyed Napoleon. Inthe first place it is hard to understand where the profundity and geniusof this movement lay, for not much mental effort was needed to see thatthe best position for an army when it is not being attacked is wherethere are most provisions; and even a dull boy of thirteen could haveguessed that the best position for an army after its retreat from Moscowin 1812 was on the Kaluga road. So it is impossible to understand bywhat reasoning the historians reach the conclusion that this maneuverwas a profound one. And it is even more difficult to understand just whythey think that this maneuver was calculated to save Russia and destroythe French; for this flank march, had it been preceded, accompanied, orfollowed by other circumstances, might have proved ruinous to theRussians and salutary for the French. If the position of the Russianarmy really began to improve from the time of that march, it does not atall follow that the march was the cause of it.That flank march might not only have failed to give any advantage to theRussian army, but might in other circumstances have led to itsdestruction. What would have happened had Moscow not burned down? IfMurat had not lost sight of the Russians? If Napoleon had not remainedinactive? If the Russian army at Krasnaya Pakhra had given battle asBennigsen and Barclay advised? What would have happened had the Frenchattacked the Russians while they were marching beyond the Pakhra? Whatwould have happened if on approaching Tarutino, Napoleon had attackedthe Russians with but a tenth of the energy he had shown when heattacked them at Smolensk? What would have happened had the French movedon Petersburg?... In any of these eventualities the flank march thatbrought salvation might have proved disastrous.The third and most incomprehensible thing is that people studyinghistory deliberately avoid seeing that this flank march cannot beattributed to any one man, that no one ever foresaw it, and that inreality, like the retreat from Fili, it did not suggest itself to anyonein its entirety, but resulted--moment by moment, step by step, event byevent--from an endless number of most diverse circumstances and was onlyseen in its entirety when it had been accomplished and belonged to thepast.At the council at Fili the prevailing thought in the minds of theRussian commanders was the one naturally suggesting itself, namely, adirect retreat by the Nizhni road. In proof of this there is the factthat the majority of the council voted for such a retreat, and above allthere is the well-known conversation after the council, between thecommander in chief and Lanskoy, who was in charge of the commissariatdepartment. Lanskoy informed the commander-in-chief that the armysupplies were for the most part stored along the Oka in the Tula andRyazan provinces, and that if they retreated on Nizhni the army would beseparated from its supplies by the broad river Oka, which cannot becrossed early in winter. This was the first indication of the necessityof deviating from what had previously seemed the most natural course--adirect retreat on Nizhni-Novgorod. The army turned more to the south,along the Ryazan road and nearer to its supplies. Subsequently theinactivity of the French (who even lost sight of the Russian army),concern for the safety of the arsenal at Tula, and especially theadvantages of drawing nearer to its supplies caused the army to turnstill further south to the Tula road. Having crossed over, by a forcedmarch, to the Tula road beyond the Pakhra, the Russian commandersintended to remain at Podolsk and had no thought of the Tarutinoposition; but innumerable circumstances and the reappearance of Frenchtroops who had for a time lost touch with the Russians, and projects ofgiving battle, and above all the abundance of provisions in Kalugaprovince, obliged our army to turn still more to the south and to crossfrom the Tula to the Kaluga road and go to Tarutino, which was betweenthe roads along which those supplies lay. Just as it is impossible tosay when it was decided to abandon Moscow, so it is impossible to sayprecisely when, or by whom, it was decided to move to Tarutino. Onlywhen the army had got there, as the result of innumerable and varyingforces, did people begin to assure themselves that they had desired thismovement and long ago foreseen its result.CHAPTER IIThe famous flank movement merely consisted in this: after the advance ofthe French had ceased, the Russian army, which had been continuallyretreating straight back from the invaders, deviated from that directcourse and, not finding itself pursued, was naturally drawn toward thedistrict where supplies were abundant.If instead of imagining to ourselves commanders of genius leading theRussian army, we picture that army without any leaders, it could nothave done anything but make a return movement toward Moscow, describingan arc in the direction where most provisions were to be found and wherethe country was richest.That movement from the Nizhni to the Ryazan, Tula, and Kaluga roads wasso natural that even the Russian marauders moved in that direction, anddemands were sent from Petersburg for Kutuzov to take his army that way.At Tarutino Kutuzov received what was almost a reprimand from theEmperor for having moved his army along the Ryazan road, and theEmperor's letter indicated to him the very position he had alreadyoccupied near Kaluga.Having rolled like a ball in the direction of the impetus given by thewhole campaign and by the battle of Borodino, the Russian army--when thestrength of that impetus was exhausted and no fresh push was received--assumed the position natural to it.Kutuzov's merit lay, not in any strategic maneuver of genius, as it iscalled, but in the fact that he alone understood the significance ofwhat had happened. He alone then understood the meaning of the Frencharmy's inactivity, he alone continued to assert that the battle ofBorodino had been a victory, he alone--who as commander-in-chief mighthave been expected to be eager to attack--employed his whole strength torestrain the Russian army from useless engagements.The beast wounded at Borodino was lying where the fleeing hunter hadleft him; but whether he was still alive, whether he was strong andmerely lying low, the hunter did not know. Suddenly the beast was heardto moan.The moan of that wounded beast (the French army) which betrayed itscalamitous condition was the sending of Lauriston to Kutuzov's camp withovertures for peace.Napoleon, with his usual assurance that whatever entered his head wasright, wrote to Kutuzov the first words that occurred to him, thoughthey were meaningless.MONSIEUR LE PRINCE KOUTOUZOV: I am sending one of my adjutants-generalto discuss several interesting questions with you. I beg your Highnessto credit what he says to you, especially when he expresses thesentiment of esteem and special regard I have long entertained for yourperson. This letter having no other object, I pray God, monsieur lePrince Koutouzov, to keep you in His holy and gracious protection!NAPOLEON MOSCOW, OCTOBER 30, 1812Kutuzov replied: "I should be cursed by posterity were I looked on asthe initiator of a settlement of any sort. Such is the present spirit ofmy nation." But he continued to exert all his powers to restrain histroops from attacking.During the month that the French troops were pillaging in Moscow and theRussian troops were quietly encamped at Tarutino, a change had takenplace in the relative strength of the two armies--both in spirit and innumber--as a result of which the superiority had passed to the Russianside. Though the condition and numbers of the French army were unknownto the Russians, as soon as that change occurred the need of attackingat once showed itself by countless signs. These signs were: Lauriston'smission; the abundance of provisions at Tarutino; the reports coming infrom all sides of the inactivity and disorder of the French; the flow ofrecruits to our regiments; the fine weather; the long rest the Russiansoldiers had enjoyed, and the impatience to do what they had beenassembled for, which usually shows itself in an army that has beenresting; curiosity as to what the French army, so long lost sight of,was doing; the boldness with which our outposts now scouted close up tothe French stationed at Tarutino; the news of easy successes gained bypeasants and guerrilla troops over the French, the envy aroused by this;the desire for revenge that lay in the heart of every Russian as long asthe French were in Moscow, and (above all) a dim consciousness in everysoldier's mind that the relative strength of the armies had changed andthat the advantage was now on our side. There was a substantial changein the relative strength, and an advance had become inevitable. And atonce, as a clock begins to strike and chime as soon as the minute handhas completed a full circle, this change was shown by an increasedactivity, whirring, and chiming in the higher spheres.CHAPTER IIIThe Russian army was commanded by Kutuzov and his staff, and also by theEmperor from Petersburg. Before the news of the abandonment of Moscowhad been received in Petersburg, a detailed plan of the whole campaignhad been drawn up and sent to Kutuzov for his guidance. Though this planhad been drawn up on the supposition that Moscow was still in our hands,it was approved by the staff and accepted as a basis for action. Kutuzovonly replied that movements arranged from a distance were alwaysdifficult to execute. So fresh instructions were sent for the solutionof difficulties that might be encountered, as well as fresh people whowere to watch Kutuzov's actions and report upon them.Besides this, the whole staff of the Russian army was now reorganized.The posts left vacant by Bagration, who had been killed, and by Barclay,who had gone away in dudgeon, had to be filled. Very seriousconsideration was given to the question whether it would be better toput A in B's place and B in D's, or on the contrary to put D in A'splace, and so on--as if anything more than A's or B's satisfactiondepended on this.As a result of the hostility between Kutuzov and Bennigsen, his Chief ofStaff, the presence of confidential representatives of the Emperor, andthese transfers, a more than usually complicated play of parties wasgoing on among the staff of the army. A was undermining B, D wasundermining C, and so on in all possible combinations and permutations.In all these plottings the subject of intrigue was generally the conductof the war, which all these men believed they were directing; but thisaffair of the war went on independently of them, as it had to go: thatis, never in the way people devised, but flowing always from theessential attitude of the masses. Only in the highest spheres did allthese schemes, crossings, and interminglings appear to be a truereflection of what had to happen.Prince Michael Ilarionovich! (wrote the Emperor on the second of Octoberin a letter that reached Kutuzov after the battle at Tarutino) SinceSeptember 2 Moscow has been in the hands of the enemy. Your last reportswere written on the twentieth, and during all this time not only has noaction been taken against the enemy or for the relief of the ancientcapital, but according to your last report you have even retreatedfarther. Serpukhov is already occupied by an enemy detachment and Tulawith its famous arsenal so indispensable to the army, is in danger. FromGeneral Wintzingerode's reports, I see that an enemy corps of tenthousand men is moving on the Petersburg road. Another corps of severalthousand men is moving on Dmitrov. A third has advanced along theVladimir road, and a fourth, rather considerable detachment is stationedbetween Ruza and Mozhaysk. Napoleon himself was in Moscow as late as thetwenty-fifth. In view of all this information, when the enemy hasscattered his forces in large detachments, and with Napoleon and hisGuards in Moscow, is it possible that the enemy's forces confronting youare so considerable as not to allow of your taking the offensive? On thecontrary, he is probably pursuing you with detachments, or at most withan army corps much weaker than the army entrusted to you. It would seemthat, availing yourself of these circumstances, you might advantageouslyattack a weaker one and annihilate him, or at least oblige him toretreat, retaining in our hands an important part of the provinces nowoccupied by the enemy, and thereby averting danger from Tula and othertowns in the interior. You will be responsible if the enemy is able todirect a force of any size against Petersburg to threaten this capitalin which it has not been possible to retain many troops; for with thearmy entrusted to you, and acting with resolution and energy, you haveample means to avert this fresh calamity. Remember that you have stillto answer to our offended country for the loss of Moscow. You haveexperienced my readiness to reward you. That readiness will not weakenin me, but I and Russia have a right to expect from you all the zeal,firmness, and success which your intellect, military talent, and thecourage of the troops you command justify us in expecting.But by the time this letter, which proved that the real relation of theforces had already made itself felt in Petersburg, was dispatched,Kutuzov had found himself unable any longer to restrain the army hecommanded from attacking and a battle had taken place.On the second of October a Cossack, Shapovalov, who was out scouting,killed one hare and wounded another. Following the wounded hare he madehis way far into the forest and came upon the left flank of Murat'sarmy, encamped there without any precautions. The Cossack laughinglytold his comrades how he had almost fallen into the hands of the French.A cornet, hearing the story, informed his commander.The Cossack was sent for and questioned. The Cossack officers wished totake advantage of this chance to capture some horses, but one of thesuperior officers, who was acquainted with the higher authorities,reported the incident to a general on the staff. The state of things onthe staff had of late been exceedingly strained. Ermolov had been to seeBennigsen a few days previously and had entreated him to use hisinfluence with the commander-in-chief to induce him to take theoffensive."If I did not know you I should think you did not want what you areasking for. I need only advise anything and his Highness is sure to dothe opposite," replied Bennigsen.The Cossack's report, confirmed by horse patrols who were sent out, wasthe final proof that events had matured. The tightly coiled spring wasreleased, the clock began to whirr and the chimes to play. Despite allhis supposed power, his intellect, his experience, and his knowledge ofmen, Kutuzov--having taken into consideration the Cossack's report, anote from Bennigsen who sent personal reports to the Emperor, the wisheshe supposed the Emperor to hold, and the fact that all the generalsexpressed the same wish--could no longer check the inevitable movement,and gave the order to do what he regarded as useless and harmful--gavehis approval, that is, to the accomplished fact.CHAPTER IVBennigsen's note and the Cossack's information that the left flank ofthe French was unguarded were merely final indications that it wasnecessary to order an attack, and it was fixed for the fifth of October.On the morning of the fourth of October Kutuzov signed the dispositions.Toll read them to Ermolov, asking him to attend to the furtherarrangements."All right--all right. I haven't time just now," replied Ermolov, andleft the hut.The dispositions drawn up by Toll were very good. As in the Austerlitzdispositions, it was written--though not in German this time:"The First Column will march here and here," "the Second Column willmarch there and there," and so on; and on paper, all these columnsarrived at their places at the appointed time and destroyed the enemy.Everything had been admirably thought out as is usual in dispositions,and as is always the case, not a single column reached its place at theappointed time.When the necessary number of copies of the dispositions had beenprepared, an officer was summoned and sent to deliver them to Ermolov todeal with. A young officer of the Horse Guards, Kutuzov's orderly,pleased at the importance of the mission entrusted to him, went toErmolov's quarters."Gone away," said Ermolov's orderly.The officer of the Horse Guards went to a general with whom Ermolov wasoften to be found."No, and the general's out too."The officer, mounting his horse, rode off to someone else."No, he's gone out.""If only they don't make me responsible for this delay! What a nuisanceit is!" thought the officer, and he rode round the whole camp. One mansaid he had seen Ermolov ride past with some other generals, others saidhe must have returned home. The officer searched till six o'clock in theevening without even stopping to eat. Ermolov was nowhere to be foundand no one knew where he was. The officer snatched a little food at acomrade's, and rode again to the vanguard to find Miloradovich.Miloradovich too was away, but here he was told that he had gone to aball at General Kikin's and that Ermolov was probably there too."But where is it?""Why, there, over at Echkino," said a Cossack officer, pointing to acountry house in the far distance."What, outside our line?""They've put two regiments as outposts, and they're having such a spreethere, it's awful! Two bands and three sets of singers!"The officer rode out beyond our lines to Echkino. While still at adistance he heard as he rode the merry sounds of a soldier's dance songproceeding from the house."In the meadows... in the meadows!" he heard, accompanied by whistlingand the sound of a torban, drowned every now and then by shouts. Thesesounds made his spirits rise, but at the same time he was afraid that hewould be blamed for not having executed sooner the important orderentrusted to him. It was already past eight o'clock. He dismounted andwent up into the porch of a large country house which had remainedintact between the Russian and French forces. In the refreshment roomand the hall, footmen were bustling about with wine and viands. Groupsof singers stood outside the windows. The officer was admitted andimmediately saw all the chief generals of the army together, and amongthem Ermolov's big imposing figure. They all had their coats unbuttonedand were standing in a semicircle with flushed and animated faces,laughing loudly. In the middle of the room a short handsome general witha red face was dancing the trepak with much spirit and agility."Ha, ha, ha! Bravo, Nicholas Ivanych! Ha, ha, ha!"The officer felt that by arriving with important orders at such a momenthe was doubly to blame, and he would have preferred to wait; but one ofthe generals espied him and, hearing what he had come about, informedErmolov.Ermolov came forward with a frown on his face and, hearing what theofficer had to say, took the papers from him without a word."You think he went off just by chance?" said a comrade, who was on thestaff that evening, to the officer of the Horse Guards, referring toErmolov. "It was a trick. It was done on purpose to get Konovnitsyn intotrouble. You'll see what a mess there'll be tomorrow."CHAPTER VNext day the decrepit Kutuzov, having given orders to be called early,said his prayers, dressed, and, with an unpleasant consciousness ofhaving to direct a battle he did not approve of, got into his calecheand drove from Letashovka (a village three and a half miles fromTarutino) to the place where the attacking columns were to meet. He satin the caleche, dozing and waking up by turns, and listening for anysound of firing on the right as an indication that the action had begun.But all was still quiet. A damp dull autumn morning was just dawning. Onapproaching Tarutino Kutuzov noticed cavalrymen leading their horses towater across the road along which he was driving. Kutuzov looked at themsearchingly, stopped his carriage, and inquired what regiment theybelonged to. They belonged to a column that should have been far infront and in ambush long before then. "It may be a mistake," thought theold commander-in-chief. But a little further on he saw infantryregiments with their arms piled and the soldiers, only partly dressed,eating their rye porridge and carrying fuel. He sent for an officer. Theofficer reported that no order to advance had been received."How! Not rec..." Kutuzov began, but checked himself immediately andsent for a senior officer. Getting out of his caleche, he waited withdrooping head and breathing heavily, pacing silently up and down. WhenEykhen, the officer of the general staff whom he had summoned, appeared,Kutuzov went purple in the face, not because that officer was to blamefor the mistake, but because he was an object of sufficient importancefor him to vent his wrath on. Trembling and panting the old man fellinto that state of fury in which he sometimes used to roll on theground, and he fell upon Eykhen, threatening him with his hands,shouting and loading him with gross abuse. Another man, Captain Brozin,who happened to turn up and who was not at all to blame, suffered thesame fate."What sort of another blackguard are you? I'll have you shot!Scoundrels!" yelled Kutuzov in a hoarse voice, waving his arms andreeling.He was suffering physically. He, the commander-in-chief, a SereneHighness who everybody said possessed powers such as no man had ever hadin Russia, to be placed in this position--made the laughingstock of thewhole army! "I needn't have been in such a hurry to pray about today, orhave kept awake thinking everything over all night," thought he tohimself. "When I was a chit of an officer no one would have dared tomock me so... and now!" He was in a state of physical suffering as iffrom corporal punishment, and could not avoid expressing it by cries ofanger and distress. But his strength soon began to fail him, and lookingabout him, conscious of having said much that was amiss, he again gotinto his caleche and drove back in silence.His wrath, once expended, did not return, and blinking feebly helistened to excuses and self-justifications (Ermolov did not come to seehim till the next day) and to the insistence of Bennigsen, Konovnitsyn,and Toll that the movement that had miscarried should be executed nextday. And once more Kutuzov had to consent.CHAPTER VINext day the troops assembled in their appointed places in the eveningand advanced during the night. It was an autumn night with dark purpleclouds, but no rain. The ground was damp but not muddy, and the troopsadvanced noiselessly, only occasionally a jingling of the artillerycould be faintly heard. The men were forbidden to talk out loud, tosmoke their pipes, or to strike a light, and they tried to prevent theirhorses neighing. The secrecy of the undertaking heightened its charm andthey marched gaily. Some columns, supposing they had reached theirdestination, halted, piled arms, and settled down on the cold ground,but the majority marched all night and arrived at places where theyevidently should not have been.Only Count Orlov-Denisov with his Cossacks (the least importantdetachment of all) got to his appointed place at the right time. Thisdetachment halted at the outskirts of a forest, on the path leading fromthe village of Stromilova to Dmitrovsk.Toward dawn, Count Orlov-Denisov, who had dozed off, was awakened by adeserter from the French army being brought to him. This was a Polishsergeant of Poniatowski's corps, who explained in Polish that he hadcome over because he had been slighted in the service: that he oughtlong ago to have been made an officer, that he was braver than any ofthem, and so he had left them and wished to pay them out. He said thatMurat was spending the night less than a mile from where they were, andthat if they would let him have a convoy of a hundred men he wouldcapture him alive. Count Orlov-Denisov consulted his fellow officers.The offer was too tempting to be refused. Everyone volunteered to go andeverybody advised making the attempt. After much disputing and arguing,Major-General Grekov with two Cossack regiments decided to go with thePolish sergeant."Now, remember," said Count Orlov-Denisov to the sergeant at parting,"if you have been lying I'll have you hanged like a dog; but if it'strue you shall have a hundred gold pieces!"Without replying, the sergeant, with a resolute air, mounted and rodeaway with Grekov whose men had quickly assembled. They disappeared intothe forest, and Count Orlov-Denisov, having seen Grekov off, returned,shivering from the freshness of the early dawn and excited by what hehad undertaken on his own responsibility, and began looking at the enemycamp, now just visible in the deceptive light of dawn and the dyingcampfires. Our columns ought to have begun to appear on an opendeclivity to his right. He looked in that direction, but though thecolumns would have been visible quite far off, they were not to be seen.It seemed to the count that things were beginning to stir in the Frenchcamp, and his keen-sighted adjutant confirmed this."Oh, it is really too late," said Count Orlov, looking at the camp.As often happens when someone we have trusted is no longer before oureyes, it suddenly seemed quite clear and obvious to him that thesergeant was an impostor, that he had lied, and that the whole Russianattack would be ruined by the absence of those two regiments, which hewould lead away heaven only knew where. How could one capture acommander-in-chief from among such a mass of troops!"I am sure that rascal was lying," said the count."They can still be called back," said one of his suite, who like CountOrlov felt distrustful of the adventure when he looked at the enemy'scamp."Eh? Really... what do you think? Should we let them go on or not?""Will you have them fetched back?""Fetch them back, fetch them back!" said Count Orlov with suddendetermination, looking at his watch. "It will be too late. It is quitelight."And the adjutant galloped through the forest after Grekov. When Grekovreturned, Count Orlov-Denisov, excited both by the abandoned attempt andby vainly awaiting the infantry columns that still did not appear, aswell as by the proximity of the enemy, resolved to advance. All his menfelt the same excitement."Mount!" he commanded in a whisper. The men took their places andcrossed themselves.... "Forward, with God's aid!""Hurrah-ah-ah!" reverberated in the forest, and the Cossack companies,trailing their lances and advancing one after another as if poured outof a sack, dashed gaily across the brook toward the camp.One desperate, frightened yell from the first French soldier who saw theCossacks, and all who were in the camp, undressed and only just wakingup, ran off in all directions, abandoning cannons, muskets, and horses.Had the Cossacks pursued the French, without heeding what was behind andaround them, they would have captured Murat and everything there. Thatwas what the officers desired. But it was impossible to make theCossacks budge when once they had got booty and prisoners. None of themlistened to orders. Fifteen hundred prisoners and thirty-eight guns weretaken on the spot, besides standards and (what seemed most important tothe Cossacks) horses, saddles, horsecloths, and the like. All this hadto be dealt with, the prisoners and guns secured, the booty divided--notwithout some shouting and even a little fighting among themselves--andit was on this that the Cossacks all busied themselves.The French, not being farther pursued, began to recover themselves: theyformed into detachments and began firing. Orlov-Denisov, still waitingfor the other columns to arrive, advanced no further.Meantime, according to the dispositions which said that "the FirstColumn will march" and so on, the infantry of the belated columns,commanded by Bennigsen and directed by Toll, had started in due orderand, as always happens, had got somewhere, but not to their appointedplaces. As always happens the men, starting cheerfully, began to halt;murmurs were heard, there was a sense of confusion, and finally abackward movement. Adjutants and generals galloped about, shouted, grewangry, quarreled, said they had come quite wrong and were late, gavevent to a little abuse, and at last gave it all up and went forward,simply to get somewhere. "We shall get somewhere or other!" And they didindeed get somewhere, though not to their right places; a few eventuallyeven got to their right place, but too late to be of any use and only intime to be fired at. Toll, who in this battle played the part ofWeyrother at Austerlitz, galloped assiduously from place to place,finding everything upside down everywhere. Thus he stumbled on Bagovut'scorps in a wood when it was already broad daylight, though the corpsshould long before have joined Orlov-Denisov. Excited and vexed by thefailure and supposing that someone must be responsible for it, Tollgalloped up to the commander of the corps and began upbraiding himseverely, saying that he ought to be shot. General Bagovut, a fightingold soldier of placid temperament, being also upset by all the delay,confusion, and cross-purposes, fell into a rage to everybody's surpriseand quite contrary to his usual character and said disagreeable thingsto Toll."I prefer not to take lessons from anyone, but I can die with my men aswell as anybody," he said, and advanced with a single division.Coming out onto a field under the enemy's fire, this brave general wentstraight ahead, leading his men under fire, without considering in hisagitation whether going into action now, with a single division, wouldbe of any use or no. Danger, cannon balls, and bullets were just what heneeded in his angry mood. One of the first bullets killed him, and otherbullets killed many of his men. And his division remained under fire forsome time quite uselessly.CHAPTER VIIMeanwhile another column was to have attacked the French from the front,but Kutuzov accompanied that column. He well knew that nothing butconfusion would come of this battle undertaken against his will, and asfar as was in his power held the troops back. He did not advance.He rode silently on his small gray horse, indolently answeringsuggestions that they should attack."The word attack is always on your tongue, but you don't see that we areunable to execute complicated maneuvers," said he to Miloradovich whoasked permission to advance."We couldn't take Murat prisoner this morning or get to the place intime, and nothing can be done now!" he replied to someone else.When Kutuzov was informed that at the French rear--where according tothe reports of the Cossacks there had previously been nobody--there werenow two battalions of Poles, he gave a sidelong glance at Ermolov whowas behind him and to whom he had not spoken since the previous day."You see! They are asking to attack and making plans of all kinds, butas soon as one gets to business nothing is ready, and the enemy,forewarned, takes measures accordingly."Ermolov screwed up his eyes and smiled faintly on hearing these words.He understood that for him the storm had blown over, and that Kutuzovwould content himself with that hint."He's having a little fun at my expense," said Ermolov softly, nudgingwith his knee Raevski who was at his side.Soon after this, Ermolov moved up to Kutuzov and respectfully remarked:"It is not too late yet, your Highness--the enemy has not gone away--ifyou were to order an attack! If not, the Guards will not so much as seea little smoke."Kutuzov did not reply, but when they reported to him that Murat's troopswere in retreat he ordered an advance, though at every hundred paces hehalted for three quarters of an hour.The whole battle consisted in what Orlov-Denisov's Cossacks had done:the rest of the army merely lost some hundreds of men uselessly.In consequence of this battle Kutuzov received a diamond decoration, andBennigsen some diamonds and a hundred thousand rubles, others alsoreceived pleasant recognitions corresponding to their various grades,and following the battle fresh changes were made in the staff."That's how everything is done with us, all topsy-turvy!" said theRussian officers and generals after the Tarutino battle, letting it beunderstood that some fool there is doing things all wrong but that weourselves should not have done so, just as people speak today. Butpeople who talk like that either do not know what they are talking aboutor deliberately deceive themselves. No battle--Tarutino, Borodino, orAusterlitz--takes place as those who planned it anticipated. That is anessential condition.A countless number of free forces (for nowhere is man freer than duringa battle, where it is a question of life and death) influence the coursetaken by the fight, and that course never can be known in advance andnever coincides with the direction of any one force.If many simultaneously and variously directed forces act on a givenbody, the direction of its motion cannot coincide with any one of thoseforces, but will always be a mean--what in mechanics is represented bythe diagonal of a parallelogram of forces.If in the descriptions given by historians, especially French ones, wefind their wars and battles carried out in accordance with previouslyformed plans, the only conclusion to be drawn is that those descriptionsare false.The battle of Tarutino obviously did not attain the aim Toll had inview--to lead the troops into action in the order prescribed by thedispositions; nor that which Count Orlov-Denisov may have had in view--to take Murat prisoner; nor the result of immediately destroying thewhole corps, which Bennigsen and others may have had in view; nor theaim of the officer who wished to go into action to distinguish himself;nor that of the Cossack who wanted more booty than he got, and so on.But if the aim of the battle was what actually resulted and what all theRussians of that day desired--to drive the French out of Russia anddestroy their army--it is quite clear that the battle of Tarutino, justbecause of its incongruities, was exactly what was wanted at that stageof the campaign. It would be difficult and even impossible to imagineany result more opportune than the actual outcome of this battle. With aminimum of effort and insignificant losses, despite the greatestconfusion, the most important results of the whole campaign wereattained: the transition from retreat to advance, an exposure of theweakness of the French, and the administration of that shock whichNapoleon's army had only awaited to begin its flight.CHAPTER VIIINapoleon enters Moscow after the brilliant victory de la Moskowa; therecan be no doubt about the victory for the battlefield remains in thehands of the French. The Russians retreat and abandon their ancientcapital. Moscow, abounding in provisions, arms, munitions, andincalculable wealth, is in Napoleon's hands. The Russian army, only halfthe strength of the French, does not make a single attempt to attack fora whole month. Napoleon's position is most brilliant. He can either fallon the Russian army with double its strength and destroy it; negotiatean advantageous peace, or in case of a refusal make a menacing move onPetersburg, or even, in the case of a reverse, return to Smolensk orVilna; or remain in Moscow; in short, no special genius would seem to berequired to retain the brilliant position the French held at that time.For that, only very simple and easy steps were necessary: not to allowthe troops to loot, to prepare winter clothing--of which there wassufficient in Moscow for the whole army--and methodically to collect theprovisions, of which (according to the French historians) there wereenough in Moscow to supply the whole army for six months. Yet Napoleon,that greatest of all geniuses, who the historians declare had control ofthe army, took none of these steps.He not merely did nothing of the kind, but on the contrary he used hispower to select the most foolish and ruinous of all the courses open tohim. Of all that Napoleon might have done: wintering in Moscow,advancing on Petersburg or on Nizhni-Novgorod, or retiring by a morenortherly or more southerly route (say by the road Kutuzov afterwardstook), nothing more stupid or disastrous can be imagined than what heactually did. He remained in Moscow till October, letting the troopsplunder the city; then, hesitating whether to leave a garrison behindhim, he quitted Moscow, approached Kutuzov without joining battle,turned to the right and reached Malo-Yaroslavets, again withoutattempting to break through and take the road Kutuzov took, but retiringinstead to Mozhaysk along the devastated Smolensk road. Nothing morestupid than that could have been devised, or more disastrous for thearmy, as the sequel showed. Had Napoleon's aim been to destroy his army,the most skillful strategist could hardly have devised any series ofactions that would so completely have accomplished that purpose,independently of anything the Russian army might do.Napoleon, the man of genius, did this! But to say that he destroyed hisarmy because he wished to, or because he was very stupid, would be asunjust as to say that he had brought his troops to Moscow because hewished to and because he was very clever and a genius.In both cases his personal activity, having no more force than thepersonal activity of any soldier, merely coincided with the laws thatguided the event.The historians quite falsely represent Napoleon's faculties as havingweakened in Moscow, and do so only because the results did not justifyhis actions. He employed all his ability and strength to do the best hecould for himself and his army, as he had done previously and as he didsubsequently in 1813. His activity at that time was no less astoundingthan it was in Egypt, in Italy, in Austria, and in Prussia. We do notknow for certain in how far his genius was genuine in Egypt--where fortycenturies looked down upon his grandeur--for his great exploits thereare all told us by Frenchmen. We cannot accurately estimate his geniusin Austria or Prussia, for we have to draw our information from Frenchor German sources, and the incomprehensible surrender of whole corpswithout fighting and of fortresses without a siege must incline Germansto recognize his genius as the only explanation of the war carried on inGermany. But we, thank God, have no need to recognize his genius inorder to hide our shame. We have paid for the right to look at thematter plainly and simply, and we will not abandon that right.His activity in Moscow was as amazing and as full of genius aselsewhere. Order after order and plan after plan were issued by him fromthe time he entered Moscow till the time he left it. The absence ofcitizens and of a deputation, and even the burning of Moscow, did notdisconcert him. He did not lose sight either of the welfare of his armyor of the doings of the enemy, or of the welfare of the people ofRussia, or of the direction of affairs in Paris, or of diplomaticconsiderations concerning the terms of the anticipated peace.CHAPTER IXWith regard to military matters, Napoleon immediately on his entry intoMoscow gave General Sabastiani strict orders to observe the movements ofthe Russian army, sent army corps out along the different roads, andcharged Murat to find Kutuzov. Then he gave careful directions about thefortification of the Kremlin, and drew up a brilliant plan for a futurecampaign over the whole map of Russia.With regard to diplomatic questions, Napoleon summoned Captain Yakovlev,who had been robbed and was in rags and did not know how to get out ofMoscow, minutely explained to him his whole policy and his magnanimity,and having written a letter to the Emperor Alexander in which heconsidered it his duty to inform his Friend and Brother that Rostopchinhad managed affairs badly in Moscow, he dispatched Yakovlev toPetersburg.Having similarly explained his views and his magnanimity to Tutolmin, hedispatched that old man also to Petersburg to negotiate.With regard to legal matters, immediately after the fires he gave ordersto find and execute the incendiaries. And the scoundrel Rostopchin waspunished by an order to burn down his houses.With regard to administrative matters, Moscow was granted aconstitution. A municipality was established and the followingannouncement issued:INHABITANTS OF MOSCOW!Your misfortunes are cruel, but His Majesty the Emperor and King desiresto arrest their course. Terrible examples have taught you how hepunishes disobedience and crime. Strict measures have been taken to putan end to disorder and to re-establish public security. A paternaladministration, chosen from among yourselves, will form yourmunicipality or city government. It will take care of you, of yourneeds, and of your welfare. Its members will be distinguished by a redribbon worn across the shoulder, and the mayor of the city will wear awhite belt as well. But when not on duty they will only wear a redribbon round the left arm.The city police is established on its former footing, and better orderalready prevails in consequence of its activity. The government hasappointed two commissaries general, or chiefs of police, and twentycommissaries or captains of wards have been appointed to the differentwards of the city. You will recognize them by the white ribbon they willwear on the left arm. Several churches of different denominations areopen, and divine service is performed in them unhindered. Your fellowcitizens are returning every day to their homes and orders have beengiven that they should find in them the help and protection due to theirmisfortunes. These are the measures the government has adopted to re-establish order and relieve your condition. But to achieve this aim itis necessary that you should add your efforts and should, if possible,forget the misfortunes you have suffered, should entertain the hope of aless cruel fate, should be certain that inevitable and ignominious deathawaits those who make any attempt on your persons or on what remains ofyour property, and finally that you should not doubt that these will besafeguarded, since such is the will of the greatest and most just ofmonarchs. Soldiers and citizens, of whatever nation you may be, re-establish public confidence, the source of the welfare of a state, livelike brothers, render mutual aid and protection one to another, unite todefeat the intentions of the evil-minded, obey the military and civilauthorities, and your tears will soon cease to flow!With regard to supplies for the army, Napoleon decreed that all thetroops in turn should enter Moscow a la maraude * to obtain provisionsfor themselves, so that the army might have its future provided for.* As looters.With regard to religion, Napoleon ordered the priests to be brought backand services to be again performed in the churches.With regard to commerce and to provisioning the army, the following wasplacarded everywhere:PROCLAMATION!You, peaceful inhabitants of Moscow, artisans and workmen whommisfortune has driven from the city, and you scattered tillers of thesoil, still kept out in the fields by groundless fear, listen!Tranquillity is returning to this capital and order is being restored init. Your fellow countrymen are emerging boldly from their hiding placeson finding that they are respected. Any violence to them or to theirproperty is promptly punished. His Majesty the Emperor and King protectsthem, and considers no one among you his enemy except those who disobeyhis orders. He desires to end your misfortunes and restore you to yourhomes and families. Respond, therefore, to his benevolent intentions andcome to us without fear. Inhabitants, return with confidence to yourabodes! You will soon find means of satisfying your needs. Craftsmen andindustrious artisans, return to your work, your houses, your shops,where the protection of guards awaits you! You shall receive proper payfor your work. And lastly you too, peasants, come from the forests whereyou are hiding in terror, return to your huts without fear, in fullassurance that you will find protection! Markets are established in thecity where peasants can bring their surplus supplies and the products ofthe soil. The government has taken the following steps to ensure freedomof sale for them: (1) From today, peasants, husbandmen, and those livingin the neighborhood of Moscow may without any danger bring theirsupplies of all kinds to two appointed markets, of which one is on theMokhovaya Street and the other at the Provision Market. (2) Suchsupplies will be bought from them at such prices as seller and buyer mayagree on, and if a seller is unable to obtain a fair price he will befree to take his goods back to his village and no one may hinder himunder any pretense. (3) Sunday and Wednesday of each week are appointedas the chief market days and to that end a sufficient number of troopswill be stationed along the highroads on Tuesdays and Saturdays at suchdistances from the town as to protect the carts. (4) Similar measureswill be taken that peasants with their carts and horses may meet with nohindrance on their return journey. (5) Steps will immediately be takento re-establish ordinary trading.Inhabitants of the city and villages, and you, workingmen and artisans,to whatever nation you belong, you are called on to carry out thepaternal intentions of His Majesty the Emperor and King and to co-operate with him for the public welfare! Lay your respect and confidenceat his feet and do not delay to unite with us!With the object of raising the spirits of the troops and of the people,reviews were constantly held and rewards distributed. The Emperor rodethrough the streets to comfort the inhabitants, and, despite hispreoccupation with state affairs, himself visited the theaters that wereestablished by his order.In regard to philanthropy, the greatest virtue of crowned heads,Napoleon also did all in his power. He caused the words Maison de maMere to be inscribed on the charitable institutions, thereby combiningtender filial affection with the majestic benevolence of a monarch. Hevisited the Foundling Hospital and, allowing the orphans saved by him tokiss his white hands, graciously conversed with Tutolmin. Then, asThiers eloquently recounts, he ordered his soldiers to be paid in forgedRussian money which he had prepared: "Raising the use of these means byan act worthy of himself and of the French army, he let relief bedistributed to those who had been burned out. But as food was tooprecious to be given to foreigners, who were for the most part enemies,Napoleon preferred to supply them with money with which to purchase foodfrom outside, and had paper rubles distributed to them."With reference to army discipline, orders were continually being issuedto inflict severe punishment for the nonperformance of military dutiesand to suppress robbery.CHAPTER XBut strange to say, all these measures, efforts, and plans--which werenot at all worse than others issued in similar circumstances--did notaffect the essence of the matter but, like the hands of a clock detachedfrom the mechanism, swung about in an arbitrary and aimless way withoutengaging the cogwheels.With reference to the military side--the plan of campaign--that work ofgenius of which Thiers remarks that, "His genius never devised anythingmore profound, more skillful, or more admirable," and enters into apolemic with M. Fain to prove that this work of genius must be referrednot to the fourth but to the fifteenth of October--that plan never wasor could be executed, for it was quite out of touch with the facts ofthe case. The fortifying of the Kremlin, for which la Mosquee (asNapoleon termed the church of Basil the Beatified) was to have beenrazed to the ground, proved quite useless. The mining of the Kremlinonly helped toward fulfilling Napoleon's wish that it should be blown upwhen he left Moscow--as a child wants the floor on which he has hurthimself to be beaten. The pursuit of the Russian army, about whichNapoleon was so concerned, produced an unheard-of result. The Frenchgenerals lost touch with the Russian army of sixty thousand men, andaccording to Thiers it was only eventually found, like a lost pin, bythe skill--and apparently the genius--of Murat.With reference to diplomacy, all Napoleon's arguments as to hismagnanimity and justice, both to Tutolmin and to Yakovlev (whose chiefconcern was to obtain a greatcoat and a conveyance), proved useless;Alexander did not receive these envoys and did not reply to theirembassage.With regard to legal matters, after the execution of the supposedincendiaries the rest of Moscow burned down.With regard to administrative matters, the establishment of amunicipality did not stop the robberies and was only of use to certainpeople who formed part of that municipality and under pretext ofpreserving order looted Moscow or saved their own property from beinglooted.With regard to religion, as to which in Egypt matters had so easily beensettled by Napoleon's visit to a mosque, no results were achieved. Twoor three priests who were found in Moscow did try to carry outNapoleon's wish, but one of them was slapped in the face by a Frenchsoldier while conducting service, and a French official reported ofanother that: "The priest whom I found and invited to say Mass cleanedand locked up the church. That night the doors were again broken open,the padlocks smashed, the books mutilated, and other disordersperpetrated."With reference to commerce, the proclamation to industrious workmen andto peasants evoked no response. There were no industrious workmen, andthe peasants caught the commissaries who ventured too far out of townwith the proclamation and killed them.As to the theaters for the entertainment of the people and the troops,these did not meet with success either. The theaters set up in theKremlin and in Posnyakov's house were closed again at once because theactors and actresses were robbed.Even philanthropy did not have the desired effect. The genuine as wellas the false paper money which flooded Moscow lost its value. TheFrench, collecting booty, cared only for gold. Not only was the papermoney valueless which Napoleon so graciously distributed to theunfortunate, but even silver lost its value in relation to gold.But the most amazing example of the ineffectiveness of the orders givenby the authorities at that time was Napoleon's attempt to stop thelooting and re-establish discipline.This is what the army authorities were reporting:"Looting continues in the city despite the decrees against it. Order isnot yet restored and not a single merchant is carrying on trade in alawful manner. The sutlers alone venture to trade, and they sell stolengoods.""The neighborhood of my ward continues to be pillaged by soldiers of the3rd Corps who, not satisfied with taking from the unfortunateinhabitants hiding in the cellars the little they have left, even havethe ferocity to wound them with their sabers, as I have repeatedlywitnessed.""Nothing new, except that the soldiers are robbing and pillaging--October 9.""Robbery and pillaging continue. There is a band of thieves in ourdistrict who ought to be arrested by a strong force--October 11.""The Emperor is extremely displeased that despite the strict orders tostop pillage, parties of marauding Guards are continually seen returningto the Kremlin. Among the Old Guard disorder and pillage were renewedmore violently than ever yesterday evening, last night, and today. TheEmperor sees with regret that the picked soldiers appointed to guard hisperson, who should set an example of discipline, carry disobedience tosuch a point that they break into the cellars and stores containing armysupplies. Others have disgraced themselves to the extent of disobeyingsentinels and officers, and have abused and beaten them.""The Grand Marshal of the palace," wrote the governor, "complainsbitterly that in spite of repeated orders, the soldiers continue tocommit nuisances in all the courtyards and even under the very windowsof the Emperor."That army, like a herd of cattle run wild and trampling underfoot theprovender which might have saved it from starvation, disintegrated andperished with each additional day it remained in Moscow. But it did notgo away.It began to run away only when suddenly seized by a panic caused by thecapture of transport trains on the Smolensk road, and by the battle ofTarutino. The news of that battle of Tarutino, unexpectedly received byNapoleon at a review, evoked in him a desire to punish the Russians(Thiers says), and he issued the order for departure which the wholearmy was demanding.Fleeing from Moscow the soldiers took with them everything they hadstolen. Napoleon, too, carried away his own personal tresor, but onseeing the baggage trains that impeded the army, he was (Thiers says)horror-struck. And yet with his experience of war he did not order allthe superfluous vehicles to be burned, as he had done with those of acertain marshal when approaching Moscow. He gazed at the caleches andcarriages in which soldiers were riding and remarked that it was a verygood thing, as those vehicles could be used to carry provisions, thesick, and the wounded.The plight of the whole army resembled that of a wounded animal whichfeels it is perishing and does not know what it is doing. To study theskillful tactics and aims of Napoleon and his army from the time itentered Moscow till it was destroyed is like studying the dying leapsand shudders of a mortally wounded animal. Very often a wounded animal,hearing a rustle, rushes straight at the hunter's gun, runs forward andback again, and hastens its own end. Napoleon, under pressure from hiswhole army, did the same thing. The rustle of the battle of Tarutinofrightened the beast, and it rushed forward onto the hunter's gun,reached him, turned back, and finally--like any wild beast--ran backalong the most disadvantageous and dangerous path, where the old scentwas familiar.During the whole of that period Napoleon, who seems to us to have beenthe leader of all these movements--as the figurehead of a ship may seemto a savage to guide the vessel--acted like a child who, holding acouple of strings inside a carriage, thinks he is driving it.CHAPTER XIEarly in the morning of the sixth of October Pierre went out of theshed, and on returning stopped by the door to play with a little blue-gray dog, with a long body and short bandy legs, that jumped about him.This little dog lived in their shed, sleeping beside Karataev at night;it sometimes made excursions into the town but always returned again.Probably it had never had an owner, and it still belonged to nobody andhad no name. The French called it Azor; the soldier who told storiescalled it Femgalka; Karataev and others called it Gray, or sometimesFlabby. Its lack of a master, a name, or even of a breed or any definitecolor did not seem to trouble the blue-gray dog in the least. Its furrytail stood up firm and round as a plume, its bandy legs served it sowell that it would often gracefully lift a hind leg and run very easilyand quickly on three legs, as if disdaining to use all four. Everythingpleased it. Now it would roll on its back, yelping with delight, nowbask in the sun with a thoughtful air of importance, and now frolicabout playing with a chip of wood or a straw.Pierre's attire by now consisted of a dirty torn shirt (the only remnantof his former clothing), a pair of soldier's trousers which byKarataev's advice he tied with string round the ankles for warmth, and apeasant coat and cap. Physically he had changed much during this time.He no longer seemed stout, though he still had the appearance ofsolidity and strength hereditary in his family. A beard and mustachecovered the lower part of his face, and a tangle of hair, infested withlice, curled round his head like a cap. The look of his eyes wasresolute, calm, and animatedly alert, as never before. The formerslackness which had shown itself even in his eyes was now replaced by anenergetic readiness for action and resistance. His feet were bare.Pierre first looked down the field across which vehicles and horsemenwere passing that morning, then into the distance across the river, thenat the dog who was pretending to be in earnest about biting him, andthen at his bare feet which he placed with pleasure in variouspositions, moving his dirty thick big toes. Every time he looked at hisbare feet a smile of animated self-satisfaction flitted across his face.The sight of them reminded him of all he had experienced and learnedduring these weeks and this recollection was pleasant to him.For some days the weather had been calm and clear with slight frosts inthe mornings--what is called an "old wives' summer."In the sunshine the air was warm, and that warmth was particularlypleasant with the invigorating freshness of the morning frost still inthe air.On everything--far and near--lay the magic crystal glitter seen only atthat time of autumn. The Sparrow Hills were visible in the distance,with the village, the church, and the large white house. The bare trees,the sand, the bricks and roofs of the houses, the green church spire,and the corners of the white house in the distance, all stood out in thetransparent air in most delicate outline and with unnatural clearness.Near by could be seen the familiar ruins of a half-burned mansionoccupied by the French, with lilac bushes still showing dark greenbeside the fence. And even that ruined and befouled house--which in dullweather was repulsively ugly--seemed quietly beautiful now, in theclear, motionless brilliance.A French corporal, with coat unbuttoned in a homely way, a skullcap onhis head, and a short pipe in his mouth, came from behind a corner ofthe shed and approached Pierre with a friendly wink."What sunshine, Monsieur Kiril!" (Their name for Pierre.) "Eh? Just likespring!"And the corporal leaned against the door and offered Pierre his pipe,though whenever he offered it Pierre always declined it."To be on the march in such weather..." he began.Pierre inquired what was being said about leaving, and the corporal toldhim that nearly all the troops were starting and there ought to be anorder about the prisoners that day. Sokolov, one of the soldiers in theshed with Pierre, was dying, and Pierre told the corporal that somethingshould be done about him. The corporal replied that Pierre need notworry about that as they had an ambulance and a permanent hospital andarrangements would be made for the sick, and that in general everythingthat could happen had been foreseen by the authorities."Besides, Monsieur Kiril, you have only to say a word to the captain,you know. He is a man who never forgets anything. Speak to the captainwhen he makes his round, he will do anything for you."(The captain of whom the corporal spoke often had long chats with Pierreand showed him all sorts of favors.)"'You see, St. Thomas,' he said to me the other day. 'Monsieur Kiril isa man of education, who speaks French. He is a Russian seigneur who hashad misfortunes, but he is a man. He knows what's what.... If he wantsanything and asks me, he won't get a refusal. When one has studied, yousee, one likes education and well-bred people.' It is for your sake Imention it, Monsieur Kiril. The other day if it had not been for youthat affair would have ended ill."And after chatting a while longer, the corporal went away. (The affairhe had alluded to had happened a few days before--a fight between theprisoners and the French soldiers, in which Pierre had succeeded inpacifying his comrades.) Some of the prisoners who had heard Pierretalking to the corporal immediately asked what the Frenchman had said.While Pierre was repeating what he had been told about the army leavingMoscow, a thin, sallow, tattered French soldier came up to the door ofthe shed. Rapidly and timidly raising his fingers to his forehead by wayof greeting, he asked Pierre whether the soldier Platoche to whom he hadgiven a shirt to sew was in that shed.A week before the French had had boot leather and linen issued to them,which they had given out to the prisoners to make up into boots andshirts for them."Ready, ready, dear fellow!" said Karataev, coming out with a neatlyfolded shirt.Karataev, on account of the warm weather and for convenience at work,was wearing only trousers and a tattered shirt as black as soot. Hishair was bound round, workman fashion, with a wisp of lime-tree bast,and his round face seemed rounder and pleasanter than ever."A promise is own brother to performance! I said Friday and here it is,ready," said Platon, smiling and unfolding the shirt he had sewn.The Frenchman glanced around uneasily and then, as if overcoming hishesitation, rapidly threw off his uniform and put on the shirt. He had along, greasy, flowered silk waistcoat next to his sallow, thin barebody, but no shirt. He was evidently afraid the prisoners looking onwould laugh at him, and thrust his head into the shirt hurriedly. Noneof the prisoners said a word."See, it fits well!" Platon kept repeating, pulling the shirt straight.The Frenchman, having pushed his head and hands through, without raisinghis eyes, looked down at the shirt and examined the seams."You see, dear man, this is not a sewing shop, and I had no propertools; and, as they say, one needs a tool even to kill a louse," saidPlaton with one of his round smiles, obviously pleased with his work."It's good, quite good, thank you," said the Frenchman, in French, "butthere must be some linen left over."It will fit better still when it sets to your body," said Karataev,still admiring his handiwork. "You'll be nice and comfortable....""Thanks, thanks, old fellow.... But the bits left over?" said theFrenchman again and smiled. He took out an assignation ruble note andgave it to Karataev. "But give me the pieces that are over."Pierre saw that Platon did not want to understand what the Frenchman wassaying, and he looked on without interfering. Karataev thanked theFrenchman for the money and went on admiring his own work. The Frenchmaninsisted on having the pieces returned that were left over and askedPierre to translate what he said."What does he want the bits for?" said Karataev. "They'd make fine legbands for us. Well, never mind."And Karataev, with a suddenly changed and saddened expression, took asmall bundle of scraps from inside his shirt and gave it to theFrenchman without looking at him. "Oh dear!" muttered Karataev and wentaway. The Frenchman looked at the linen, considered for a moment, thenlooked inquiringly at Pierre and, as if Pierre's look had told himsomething, suddenly blushed and shouted in a squeaky voice:"Platoche! Eh, Platoche! Keep them yourself!" And handing back the oddbits he turned and went out."There, look at that," said Karataev, swaying his head. "People saidthey were not Christians, but they too have souls. It's what the oldfolk used to say: 'A sweating hand's an open hand, a dry hand's close.'He's naked, but yet he's given it back."Karataev smiled thoughtfully and was silent awhile looking at thepieces."But they'll make grand leg bands, dear friend," he said, and went backinto the shed.CHAPTER XIIFour weeks had passed since Pierre had been taken prisoner and thoughthe French had offered to move him from the men's to the officers' shed,he had stayed in the shed where he was first put.In burned and devastated Moscow Pierre experienced almost the extremelimits of privation a man can endure; but thanks to his physicalstrength and health, of which he had till then been unconscious, andthanks especially to the fact that the privations came so gradually thatit was impossible to say when they began, he endured his position notonly lightly but joyfully. And just at this time he obtained thetranquillity and ease of mind he had formerly striven in vain to reach.He had long sought in different ways that tranquillity of mind, thatinner harmony which had so impressed him in the soldiers at the battleof Borodino. He had sought it in philanthropy, in Freemasonry, in thedissipations of town life, in wine, in heroic feats of self-sacrifice,and in romantic love for Natasha; he had sought it by reasoning--and allthese quests and experiments had failed him. And now without thinkingabout it he had found that peace and inner harmony only through thehorror of death, through privation, and through what he recognized inKarataev.Those dreadful moments he had lived through at the executions had as itwere forever washed away from his imagination and memory the agitatingthoughts and feelings that had formerly seemed so important. It did notnow occur to him to think of Russia, or the war, or politics, orNapoleon. It was plain to him that all these things were no business ofhis, and that he was not called on to judge concerning them andtherefore could not do so. "Russia and summer weather are not boundtogether," he thought, repeating words of Karataev's which he foundstrangely consoling. His intention of killing Napoleon and hiscalculations of the cabalistic number of the beast of the Apocalypse nowseemed to him meaningless and even ridiculous. His anger with his wifeand anxiety that his name should not be smirched now seemed not merelytrivial but even amusing. What concern was it of his that somewhere orother that woman was leading the life she preferred? What did it matterto anybody, and especially to him, whether or not they found out thattheir prisoner's name was Count Bezukhov?He now often remembered his conversation with Prince Andrew and quiteagreed with him, though he understood Prince Andrew's thoughts somewhatdifferently. Prince Andrew had thought and said that happiness couldonly be negative, but had said it with a shade of bitterness and ironyas though he was really saying that all desire for positive happiness isimplanted in us merely to torment us and never be satisfied. But Pierrebelieved it without any mental reservation. The absence of suffering,the satisfaction of one's needs and consequent freedom in the choice ofone's occupation, that is, of one's way of life, now seemed to Pierre tobe indubitably man's highest happiness. Here and now for the first timehe fully appreciated the enjoyment of eating when he wanted to eat,drinking when he wanted to drink, sleeping when he wanted to sleep, ofwarmth when he was cold, of talking to a fellow man when he wished totalk and to hear a human voice. The satisfaction of one's needs--goodfood, cleanliness, and freedom--now that he was deprived of all this,seemed to Pierre to constitute perfect happiness; and the choice ofoccupation, that is, of his way of life--now that that was sorestricted--seemed to him such an easy matter that he forgot that asuperfluity of the comforts of life destroys all joy in satisfying one'sneeds, while great freedom in the choice of occupation--such freedom ashis wealth, his education, and his social position had given him in hisown life--is just what makes the choice of occupation insolublydifficult and destroys the desire and possibility of having anoccupation.All Pierre's daydreams now turned on the time when he would be free. Yetsubsequently, and for the rest of his life, he thought and spoke withenthusiasm of that month of captivity, of those irrecoverable, strong,joyful sensations, and chiefly of the complete peace of mind and innerfreedom which he experienced only during those weeks.When on the first day he got up early, went out of the shed at dawn, andsaw the cupolas and crosses of the New Convent of the Virgin still darkat first, the hoarfrost on the dusty grass, the Sparrow Hills, and thewooded banks above the winding river vanishing in the purple distance,when he felt the contact of the fresh air and heard the noise of thecrows flying from Moscow across the field, and when afterwards lightgleamed from the east and the sun's rim appeared solemnly from behind acloud, and the cupolas and crosses, the hoarfrost, the distance and theriver, all began to sparkle in the glad light--Pierre felt a new joy andstrength in life such as he had never before known. And this not onlystayed with him during the whole of his imprisonment, but even grew instrength as the hardships of his position increased.That feeling of alertness and of readiness for anything was stillfurther strengthened in him by the high opinion his fellow prisonersformed of him soon after his arrival at the shed. With his knowledge oflanguages, the respect shown him by the French, his simplicity, hisreadiness to give anything asked of him (he received the allowance ofthree rubles a week made to officers); with his strength, which heshowed to the soldiers by pressing nails into the walls of the hut; hisgentleness to his companions, and his capacity for sitting still andthinking without doing anything (which seemed to them incomprehensible),he appeared to them a rather mysterious and superior being. The veryqualities that had been a hindrance, if not actually harmful, to him inthe world he had lived in--his strength, his disdain for the comforts oflife, his absent-mindedness and simplicity--here among these people gavehim almost the status of a hero. And Pierre felt that their opinionplaced responsibilities upon him.CHAPTER XIIIThe French evacuation began on the night between the sixth and seventhof October: kitchens and sheds were dismantled, carts loaded, and troopsand baggage trains started.At seven in the morning a French convoy in marching trim, wearing shakosand carrying muskets, knapsacks, and enormous sacks, stood in front ofthe sheds, and animated French talk mingled with curses sounded allalong the lines.In the shed everyone was ready, dressed, belted, shod, and only awaitedthe order to start. The sick soldier, Sokolov, pale and thin with darkshadows round his eyes, alone sat in his place barefoot and not dressed.His eyes, prominent from the emaciation of his face, gazed inquiringlyat his comrades who were paying no attention to him, and he moanedregularly and quietly. It was evidently not so much his sufferings thatcaused him to moan (he had dysentery) as his fear and grief at beingleft alone.Pierre, girt with a rope round his waist and wearing shoes Karataev hadmade for him from some leather a French soldier had torn off a tea chestand brought to have his boots mended with, went up to the sick man andsquatted down beside him."You know, Sokolov, they are not all going away! They have a hospitalhere. You may be better off than we others," said Pierre."O Lord! Oh, it will be the death of me! O Lord!" moaned the man in alouder voice."I'll go and ask them again directly," said Pierre, rising and going tothe door of the shed.Just as Pierre reached the door, the corporal who had offered him a pipethe day before came up to it with two soldiers. The corporal andsoldiers were in marching kit with knapsacks and shakos that had metalstraps, and these changed their familiar faces.The corporal came, according to orders, to shut the door. The prisonershad to be counted before being let out."Corporal, what will they do with the sick man?..." Pierre began.But even as he spoke he began to doubt whether this was the corporal heknew or a stranger, so unlike himself did the corporal seem at thatmoment. Moreover, just as Pierre was speaking a sharp rattle of drumswas suddenly heard from both sides. The corporal frowned at Pierre'swords and, uttering some meaningless oaths, slammed the door. The shedbecame semidark, and the sharp rattle of the drums on two sides drownedthe sick man's groans."There it is!... It again!..." said Pierre to himself, and aninvoluntary shudder ran down his spine. In the corporal's changed face,in the sound of his voice, in the stirring and deafening noise of thedrums, he recognized that mysterious, callous force which compelledpeople against their will to kill their fellow men--that force theeffect of which he had witnessed during the executions. To fear or totry to escape that force, to address entreaties or exhortations to thosewho served as its tools, was useless. Pierre knew this now. One had towait and endure. He did not again go to the sick man, nor turn to lookat him, but stood frowning by the door of the hut.When that door was opened and the prisoners, crowding against oneanother like a flock of sheep, squeezed into the exit, Pierre pushed hisway forward and approached that very captain who as the corporal hadassured him was ready to do anything for him. The captain was also inmarching kit, and on his cold face appeared that same it which Pierrehad recognized in the corporal's words and in the roll of the drums."Pass on, pass on!" the captain reiterated, frowning sternly, andlooking at the prisoners who thronged past him.Pierre went up to him, though he knew his attempt would be vain."What now?" the officer asked with a cold look as if not recognizingPierre.Pierre told him about the sick man."He'll manage to walk, devil take him!" said the captain. "Pass on, passon!" he continued without looking at Pierre."But he is dying," Pierre again began."Be so good..." shouted the captain, frowning angrily."Dram-da-da-dam, dam-dam..." rattled the drums, and Pierre understoodthat this mysterious force completely controlled these men and that itwas now useless to say any more.The officer prisoners were separated from the soldiers and told to marchin front. There were about thirty officers, with Pierre among them, andabout three hundred men.The officers, who had come from the other sheds, were all strangers toPierre and much better dressed than he. They looked at him and at hisshoes mistrustfully, as at an alien. Not far from him walked a fat majorwith a sallow, bloated, angry face, who was wearing a Kazan dressinggown tied round with a towel, and who evidently enjoyed the respect ofhis fellow prisoners. He kept one hand, in which he clasped his tobaccopouch, inside the bosom of his dressing gown and held the stem of hispipe firmly with the other. Panting and puffing, the major grumbled andgrowled at everybody because he thought he was being pushed and thatthey were all hurrying when they had nowhere to hurry to and were allsurprised at something when there was nothing to be surprised at.Another, a thin little officer, was speaking to everyone, conjecturingwhere they were now being taken and how far they would get that day. Anofficial in felt boots and wearing a commissariat uniform ran round fromside to side and gazed at the ruins of Moscow, loudly announcing hisobservations as to what had been burned down and what this or that partof the city was that they could see. A third officer, who by his accentwas a Pole, disputed with the commissariat officer, arguing that he wasmistaken in his identification of the different wards of Moscow."What are you disputing about?" said the major angrily. "What does itmatter whether it is St. Nicholas or St. Blasius? You see it's burneddown, and there's an end of it.... What are you pushing for? Isn't theroad wide enough?" said he, turning to a man behind him who was notpushing him at all."Oh, oh, oh! What have they done?" the prisoners on one side and anotherwere heard saying as they gazed on the charred ruins. "All beyond theriver, and Zubova, and in the Kremlin.... Just look! There's not half ofit left. Yes, I told you--the whole quarter beyond the river, and so itis.""Well, you know it's burned, so what's the use of talking?" said themajor.As they passed near a church in the Khamovniki (one of the few unburnedquarters of Moscow) the whole mass of prisoners suddenly started to oneside and exclamations of horror and disgust were heard."Ah, the villains! What heathens! Yes; dead, dead, so he is... Andsmeared with something!"Pierre too drew near the church where the thing was that evoked theseexclamations, and dimly made out something leaning against the palingssurrounding the church. From the words of his comrades who saw betterthan he did, he found that this was the body of a man, set uprightagainst the palings with its face smeared with soot."Go on! What the devil... Go on! Thirty thousand devils!..." the convoyguards began cursing and the French soldiers, with fresh virulence,drove away with their swords the crowd of prisoners who were gazing atthe dead man.CHAPTER XIVThrough the cross streets of the Khamovniki quarter the prisonersmarched, followed only by their escort and the vehicles and wagonsbelonging to that escort, but when they reached the supply stores theycame among a huge and closely packed train of artillery mingled withprivate vehicles.At the bridge they all halted, waiting for those in front to get across.From the bridge they had a view of endless lines of moving baggagetrains before and behind them. To the right, where the Kaluga road turnsnear Neskuchny, endless rows of troops and carts stretched away into thedistance. These were troops of Beauharnais' corps which had startedbefore any of the others. Behind, along the riverside and across theStone Bridge, were Ney's troops and transport.Davout's troops, in whose charge were the prisoners, were crossing theCrimean bridge and some were already debouching into the Kaluga road.But the baggage trains stretched out so that the last of Beauharnais'train had not yet got out of Moscow and reached the Kaluga road when thevanguard of Ney's army was already emerging from the Great OrdynkaStreet.When they had crossed the Crimean bridge the prisoners moved a few stepsforward, halted, and again moved on, and from all sides vehicles and mencrowded closer and closer together. They advanced the few hundred pacesthat separated the bridge from the Kaluga road, taking more than an hourto do so, and came out upon the square where the streets of theTransmoskva ward and the Kaluga road converge, and the prisoners jammedclose together had to stand for some hours at that crossway. From allsides, like the roar of the sea, were heard the rattle of wheels, thetramp of feet, and incessant shouts of anger and abuse. Pierre stoodpressed against the wall of a charred house, listening to that noisewhich mingled in his imagination with the roll of the drums.To get a better view, several officer prisoners climbed onto the wall ofthe half-burned house against which Pierre was leaning."What crowds! Just look at the crowds!... They've loaded goods even onthe cannon! Look there, those are furs!" they exclaimed. "Just see whatthe blackguards have looted.... There! See what that one has behind inthe cart.... Why, those are settings taken from some icons, byheaven!... Oh, the rascals!... See how that fellow has loaded himselfup, he can hardly walk! Good lord, they've even grabbed thosechaises!... See that fellow there sitting on the trunks.... Heavens!They're fighting.""That's right, hit him on the snout--on his snout! Like this, we shan'tget away before evening. Look, look there.... Why, that must beNapoleon's own. See what horses! And the monograms with a crown! It'slike a portable house.... That fellow's dropped his sack and doesn't seeit. Fighting again... A woman with a baby, and not bad-looking either!Yes, I dare say, that's the way they'll let you pass... Just look,there's no end to it. Russian wenches, by heaven, so they are! Incarriages--see how comfortably they've settled themselves!"Again, as at the church in Khamovniki, a wave of general curiosity boreall the prisoners forward onto the road, and Pierre, thanks to hisstature, saw over the heads of the others what so attracted theircuriosity. In three carriages involved among the munition carts, closelysqueezed together, sat women with rouged faces, dressed in glaringcolors, who were shouting something in shrill voices.From the moment Pierre had recognized the appearance of the mysteriousforce nothing had seemed to him strange or dreadful: neither the corpsesmeared with soot for fun nor these women hurrying away nor the burnedruins of Moscow. All that he now witnessed scarcely made an impressionon him--as if his soul, making ready for a hard struggle, refused toreceive impressions that might weaken it.The women's vehicles drove by. Behind them came more carts, soldiers,wagons, soldiers, gun carriages, carriages, soldiers, ammunition carts,more soldiers, and now and then women.Pierre did not see the people as individuals but saw their movement.All these people and horses seemed driven forward by some invisiblepower. During the hour Pierre watched them they all came flowing fromthe different streets with one and the same desire to get on quickly;they all jostled one another, began to grow angry and to fight, whiteteeth gleamed, brows frowned, ever the same words of abuse flew fromside to side, and all the faces bore the same swaggeringly resolute andcoldly cruel expression that had struck Pierre that morning on thecorporal's face when the drums were beating.It was not till nearly evening that the officer commanding the escortcollected his men and with shouts and quarrels forced his way in amongthe baggage trains, and the prisoners, hemmed in on all sides, emergedonto the Kaluga road.They marched very quickly, without resting, and halted only when the sunbegan to set. The baggage carts drew up close together and the men beganto prepare for their night's rest. They all appeared angry anddissatisfied. For a long time, oaths, angry shouts, and fighting couldbe heard from all sides. A carriage that followed the escort ran intoone of the carts and knocked a hole in it with its pole. Severalsoldiers ran toward the cart from different sides: some beat thecarriage horses on their heads, turning them aside, others fought amongthemselves, and Pierre saw that one German was badly wounded on the headby a sword.It seemed that all these men, now that they had stopped amid fields inthe chill dusk of the autumn evening, experienced one and the samefeeling of unpleasant awakening from the hurry and eagerness to push onthat had seized them at the start. Once at a standstill they all seemedto understand that they did not yet know where they were going, and thatmuch that was painful and difficult awaited them on this journey.During this halt the escort treated the prisoners even worse than theyhad done at the start. It was here that the prisoners for the first timereceived horseflesh for their meat ration.From the officer down to the lowest soldier they showed what seemed likepersonal spite against each of the prisoners, in unexpected contrast totheir former friendly relations.This spite increased still more when, on calling over the roll ofprisoners, it was found that in the bustle of leaving Moscow one Russiansoldier, who had pretended to suffer from colic, had escaped. Pierre sawa Frenchman beat a Russian soldier cruelly for straying too far from theroad, and heard his friend the captain reprimand and threaten to court-martial a noncommissioned officer on account of the escape of theRussian. To the noncommissioned officer's excuse that the prisoner wasill and could not walk, the officer replied that the order was to shootthose who lagged behind. Pierre felt that that fatal force which hadcrushed him during the executions, but which he had not felt during hisimprisonment, now again controlled his existence. It was terrible, buthe felt that in proportion to the efforts of that fatal force to crushhim, there grew and strengthened in his soul a power of life independentof it.He ate his supper of buckwheat soup with horseflesh and chatted with hiscomrades.Neither Pierre nor any of the others spoke of what they had seen inMoscow, or of the roughness of their treatment by the French, or of theorder to shoot them which had been announced to them. As if in reactionagainst the worsening of their position they were all particularlyanimated and gay. They spoke of personal reminiscences, of amusingscenes they had witnessed during the campaign, and avoided all talk oftheir present situation.The sun had set long since. Bright stars shone out here and there in thesky. A red glow as of a conflagration spread above the horizon from therising full moon, and that vast red ball swayed strangely in the grayhaze. It grew light. The evening was ending, but the night had not yetcome. Pierre got up and left his new companions, crossing between thecampfires to the other side of the road where he had been told thecommon soldier prisoners were stationed. He wanted to talk to them. Onthe road he was stopped by a French sentinel who ordered him back.Pierre turned back, not to his companions by the campfire, but to anunharnessed cart where there was nobody. Tucking his legs under him anddropping his head he sat down on the cold ground by the wheel of thecart and remained motionless a long while sunk in thought. Suddenly heburst out into a fit of his broad, good-natured laughter, so loud thatmen from various sides turned with surprise to see what this strange andevidently solitary laughter could mean."Ha-ha-ha!" laughed Pierre. And he said aloud to himself: "The soldierdid not let me pass. They took me and shut me up. They hold me captive.What, me? Me? My immortal soul? Ha-ha-ha! Ha-ha-ha!..." and he laughedtill tears started to his eyes.A man got up and came to see what this queer big fellow was laughing atall by himself. Pierre stopped laughing, got up, went farther away fromthe inquisitive man, and looked around him.The huge, endless bivouac that had previously resounded with thecrackling of campfires and the voices of many men had grown quiet, thered campfires were growing paler and dying down. High up in the lightsky hung the full moon. Forests and fields beyond the camp, unseenbefore, were now visible in the distance. And farther still, beyondthose forests and fields, the bright, oscillating, limitless distancelured one to itself. Pierre glanced up at the sky and the twinklingstars in its faraway depths. "And all that is me, all that is within me,and it is all I!" thought Pierre. "And they caught all that and put itinto a shed boarded up with planks!" He smiled, and went and lay down tosleep beside his companions.CHAPTER XVIn the early days of October another envoy came to Kutuzov with a letterfrom Napoleon proposing peace and falsely dated from Moscow, thoughNapoleon was already not far from Kutuzov on the old Kaluga road.Kutuzov replied to this letter as he had done to the one formerlybrought by Lauriston, saying that there could be no question of peace.Soon after that a report was received from Dorokhov's guerrilladetachment operating to the left of Tarutino that troops of Broussier'sdivision had been seen at Forminsk and that being separated from therest of the French army they might easily be destroyed. The soldiers andofficers again demanded action. Generals on the staff, excited by thememory of the easy victory at Tarutino, urged Kutuzov to carry outDorokhov's suggestion. Kutuzov did not consider any offensive necessary.The result was a compromise which was inevitable: a small detachment wassent to Forminsk to attack Broussier.By a strange coincidence, this task, which turned out to be a mostdifficult and important one, was entrusted to Dokhturov--that samemodest little Dokhturov whom no one had described to us as drawing upplans of battles, dashing about in front of regiments, showering crosseson batteries, and so on, and who was thought to be and was spoken of asundecided and undiscerning--but whom we find commanding wherever theposition was most difficult all through the Russo-French wars fromAusterlitz to the year 1813. At Austerlitz he remained last at theAugezd dam, rallying the regiments, saving what was possible when allwere flying and perishing and not a single general was left in the rearguard. Ill with fever he went to Smolensk with twenty thousand men todefend the town against Napoleon's whole army. In Smolensk, at theMalakhov Gate, he had hardly dozed off in a paroxysm of fever before hewas awakened by the bombardment of the town--and Smolensk held out allday long. At the battle of Borodino, when Bagration was killed and ninetenths of the men of our left flank had fallen and the full force of theFrench artillery fire was directed against it, the man sent there wasthis same irresolute and undiscerning Dokhturov--Kutuzov hastening torectify a mistake he had made by sending someone else there first. Andthe quiet little Dokhturov rode thither, and Borodino became thegreatest glory of the Russian army. Many heroes have been described tous in verse and prose, but of Dokhturov scarcely a word has been said.It was Dokhturov again whom they sent to Forminsk and from there toMalo-Yaroslavets, the place where the last battle with the French wasfought and where the obvious disintegration of the French army began;and we are told of many geniuses and heroes of that period of thecampaign, but of Dokhturov nothing or very little is said and thatdubiously. And this silence about Dokhturov is the clearest testimony tohis merit.It is natural for a man who does not understand the workings of amachine to imagine that a shaving that has fallen into it by chance andis interfering with its action and tossing about in it is its mostimportant part. The man who does not understand the construction of themachine cannot conceive that the small connecting cogwheel whichrevolves quietly is one of the most essential parts of the machine, andnot the shaving which merely harms and hinders the working.On the tenth of October when Dokhturov had gone halfway to Forminsk andstopped at the village of Aristovo, preparing faithfully to execute theorders he had received, the whole French army having, in its convulsivemovement, reached Murat's position apparently in order to give battle--suddenly without any reason turned off to the left onto the new Kalugaroad and began to enter Forminsk, where only Broussier had been tillthen. At that time Dokhturov had under his command, besides Dorokhov'sdetachment, the two small guerrilla detachments of Figner and Seslavin.On the evening of October 11 Seslavin came to the Aristovo headquarterswith a French guardsman he had captured. The prisoner said that thetroops that had entered Forminsk that day were the vanguard of the wholearmy, that Napoleon was there and the whole army had left Moscow fourdays previously. That same evening a house serf who had come fromBorovsk said he had seen an immense army entering the town. SomeCossacks of Dokhturov's detachment reported having sighted the FrenchGuards marching along the road to Borovsk. From all these reports it wasevident that where they had expected to meet a single division there wasnow the whole French army marching from Moscow in an unexpecteddirection--along the Kaluga road. Dokhturov was unwilling to undertakeany action, as it was not clear to him now what he ought to do. He hadbeen ordered to attack Forminsk. But only Broussier had been there atthat time and now the whole French army was there. Ermolov wished to acton his own judgment, but Dokhturov insisted that he must have Kutuzov'sinstructions. So it was decided to send a dispatch to the staff.For this purpose a capable officer, Bolkhovitinov, was chosen, who wasto explain the whole affair by word of mouth, besides delivering awritten report. Toward midnight Bolkhovitinov, having received thedispatch and verbal instructions, galloped off to the General Staffaccompanied by a Cossack with spare horses.CHAPTER XVIIt was a warm, dark, autumn night. It had been raining for four days.Having changed horses twice and galloped twenty miles in an hour and ahalf over a sticky, muddy road, Bolkhovitinov reached Litashevka afterone o'clock at night. Dismounting at a cottage on whose wattle fencehung a signboard, GENERAL STAFF, and throwing down his reins, he entereda dark passage."The general on duty, quick! It's very important!" said he to someonewho had risen and was sniffing in the dark passage."He has been very unwell since the evening and this is the third nighthe has not slept," said the orderly pleadingly in a whisper. "You shouldwake the captain first.""But this is very important, from General Dokhturov," saidBolkhovitinov, entering the open door which he had found by feeling inthe dark.The orderly had gone in before him and began waking somebody."Your honor, your honor! A courier.""What? What's that? From whom?" came a sleepy voice."From Dokhturov and from Alexey Petrovich. Napoleon is at Forminsk,"said Bolkhovitinov, unable to see in the dark who was speaking butguessing by the voice that it was not Konovnitsyn.The man who had wakened yawned and stretched himself."I don't like waking him," he said, fumbling for something. "He is veryill. Perhaps this is only a rumor.""Here is the dispatch," said Bolkhovitinov. "My orders are to give it atonce to the general on duty.""Wait a moment, I'll light a candle. You damned rascal, where do youalways hide it?" said the voice of the man who was stretching himself,to the orderly. (This was Shcherbinin, Konovnitsyn's adjutant.) "I'vefound it, I've found it!" he added.The orderly was striking a light and Shcherbinin was fumbling forsomething on the candlestick."Oh, the nasty beasts!" said he with disgust.By the light of the sparks Bolkhovitinov saw Shcherbinin's youthful faceas he held the candle, and the face of another man who was still asleep.This was Konovnitsyn.When the flame of the sulphur splinters kindled by the tinder burned up,first blue and then red, Shcherbinin lit the tallow candle, from thecandlestick of which the cockroaches that had been gnawing it wererunning away, and looked at the messenger. Bolkhovitinov was bespatteredall over with mud and had smeared his face by wiping it with his sleeve."Who gave the report?" inquired Shcherbinin, taking the envelope."The news is reliable," said Bolkhovitinov. "Prisoners, Cossacks, andthe scouts all say the same thing.""There's nothing to be done, we'll have to wake him," said Shcherbinin,rising and going up to the man in the nightcap who lay covered by agreatcoat. "Peter Petrovich!" said he. (Konovnitsyn did not stir.) "Tothe General Staff!" he said with a smile, knowing that those words wouldbe sure to arouse him.And in fact the head in the nightcap was lifted at once. OnKonovnitsyn's handsome, resolute face with cheeks flushed by fever,there still remained for an instant a faraway dreamy expression remotefrom present affairs, but then he suddenly started and his face assumedits habitual calm and firm appearance."Well, what is it? From whom?" he asked immediately but without hurry,blinking at the light.While listening to the officer's report Konovnitsyn broke the seal andread the dispatch. Hardly had he done so before he lowered his legs intheir woolen stockings to the earthen floor and began putting on hisboots. Then he took off his nightcap, combed his hair over his temples,and donned his cap."Did you get here quickly? Let us go to his Highness."Konovnitsyn had understood at once that the news brought was of greatimportance and that no time must be lost. He did not consider or askhimself whether the news was good or bad. That did not interest him. Heregarded the whole business of the war not with his intelligence or hisreason but by something else. There was within him a deep unexpressedconviction that all would be well, but that one must not trust to thisand still less speak about it, but must only attend to one's own work.And he did his work, giving his whole strength to the task.Peter Petrovich Konovnitsyn, like Dokhturov, seems to have been includedmerely for propriety's sake in the list of the so-called heroes of 1812--the Barclays, Raevskis, Ermolovs, Platovs, and Miloradoviches. LikeDokhturov he had the reputation of being a man of very limited capacityand information, and like Dokhturov he never made plans of battle butwas always found where the situation was most difficult. Since hisappointment as general on duty he had always slept with his door open,giving orders that every messenger should be allowed to wake him up. Inbattle he was always under fire, so that Kutuzov reproved him for it andfeared to send him to the front, and like Dokhturov he was one of thoseunnoticed cogwheels that, without clatter or noise, constitute the mostessential part of the machine.Coming out of the hut into the damp, dark night Konovnitsyn frowned--partly from an increased pain in his head and partly at the unpleasantthought that occurred to him, of how all that nest of influential men onthe staff would be stirred up by this news, especially Bennigsen, whoever since Tarutino had been at daggers drawn with Kutuzov; and how theywould make suggestions, quarrel, issue orders, and rescind them. Andthis premonition was disagreeable to him though he knew it could not behelped.And in fact Toll, to whom he went to communicate the news, immediatelybegan to expound his plans to a general sharing his quarters, untilKonovnitsyn, who listened in weary silence, reminded him that they mustgo to see his Highness.CHAPTER XVIIKutuzov like all old people did not sleep much at night. He often fellasleep unexpectedly in the daytime, but at night, lying on his bedwithout undressing, he generally remained awake thinking.So he lay now on his bed, supporting his large, heavy, scarred head onhis plump hand, with his one eye open, meditating and peering into thedarkness.Since Bennigsen, who corresponded with the Emperor and had moreinfluence than anyone else on the staff, had begun to avoid him, Kutuzovwas more at ease as to the possibility of himself and his troops beingobliged to take part in useless aggressive movements. The lesson of theTarutino battle and of the day before it, which Kutuzov remembered withpain, must, he thought, have some effect on others too."They must understand that we can only lose by taking the offensive.Patience and time are my warriors, my champions," thought Kutuzov. Heknew that an apple should not be plucked while it is green. It will fallof itself when ripe, but if picked unripe the apple is spoiled, the treeis harmed, and your teeth are set on edge. Like an experienced sportsmanhe knew that the beast was wounded, and wounded as only the wholestrength of Russia could have wounded it, but whether it was mortallywounded or not was still an undecided question. Now by the fact ofLauriston and Barthelemi having been sent, and by the reports of theguerrillas, Kutuzov was almost sure that the wound was mortal. But heneeded further proofs and it was necessary to wait."They want to run to see how they have wounded it. Wait and we shallsee! Continual maneuvers, continual advances!" thought he. "What for?Only to distinguish themselves! As if fighting were fun. They are likechildren from whom one can't get any sensible account of what hashappened because they all want to show how well they can fight. Butthat's not what is needed now."And what ingenious maneuvers they all propose to me! It seems to themthat when they have thought of two or three contingencies" (heremembered the general plan sent him from Petersburg) "they haveforeseen everything. But the contingencies are endless."The undecided question as to whether the wound inflicted at Borodino wasmortal or not had hung over Kutuzov's head for a whole month. On the onehand the French had occupied Moscow. On the other Kutuzov felt assuredwith all his being that the terrible blow into which he and all theRussians had put their whole strength must have been mortal. But in anycase proofs were needed; he had waited a whole month for them and grewmore impatient the longer he waited. Lying on his bed during thosesleepless nights he did just what he reproached those younger generalsfor doing. He imagined all sorts of possible contingencies, just likethe younger men, but with this difference, that he saw thousands ofcontingencies instead of two or three and based nothing on them. Thelonger he thought the more contingencies presented themselves. Heimagined all sorts of movements of the Napoleonic army as a whole or insections--against Petersburg, or against him, or to outflank him. Hethought too of the possibility (which he feared most of all) thatNapoleon might fight him with his own weapon and remain in Moscowawaiting him. Kutuzov even imagined that Napoleon's army might turn backthrough Medyn and Yukhnov, but the one thing he could not foresee waswhat happened--the insane, convulsive stampede of Napoleon's army duringits first eleven days after leaving Moscow: a stampede which madepossible what Kutuzov had not yet even dared to think of--the completeextermination of the French. Dorokhov's report about Broussier'sdivision, the guerrillas' reports of distress in Napoleon's army, rumorsof preparations for leaving Moscow, all confirmed the supposition thatthe French army was beaten and preparing for flight. But these were onlysuppositions, which seemed important to the younger men but not toKutuzov. With his sixty years' experience he knew what value to attachto rumors, knew how apt people who desire anything are to group all newsso that it appears to confirm what they desire, and he knew how readilyin such cases they omit all that makes for the contrary. And the more hedesired it the less he allowed himself to believe it. This questionabsorbed all his mental powers. All else was to him only life'scustomary routine. To such customary routine belonged his conversationswith the staff, the letters he wrote from Tarutino to Madame de Stael,the reading of novels, the distribution of awards, his correspondencewith Petersburg, and so on. But the destruction of the French, which healone foresaw, was his heart's one desire.On the night of the eleventh of October he lay leaning on his arm andthinking of that.There was a stir in the next room and he heard the steps of Toll,Konovnitsyn, and Bolkhovitinov."Eh, who's there? Come in, come in! What news?" the field marshal calledout to them.While a footman was lighting a candle, Toll communicated the substanceof the news."Who brought it?" asked Kutuzov with a look which, when the candle waslit, struck Toll by its cold severity."There can be no doubt about it, your Highness.""Call him in, call him here."Kutuzov sat up with one leg hanging down from the bed and his big paunchresting against the other which was doubled under him. He screwed up hisseeing eye to scrutinize the messenger more carefully, as if wishing toread in his face what preoccupied his own mind."Tell me, tell me, friend," said he to Bolkhovitinov in his low, agedvoice, as he pulled together the shirt which gaped open on his chest,"come nearer--nearer. What news have you brought me? Eh? That Napoleonhas left Moscow? Are you sure? Eh?"Bolkhovitinov gave a detailed account from the beginning of all he hadbeen told to report."Speak quicker, quicker! Don't torture me!" Kutuzov interrupted him.Bolkhovitinov told him everything and was then silent, awaitinginstructions. Toll was beginning to say something but Kutuzov checkedhim. He tried to say something, but his face suddenly puckered andwrinkled; he waved his arm at Toll and turned to the opposite side ofthe room, to the corner darkened by the icons that hung there."O Lord, my Creator, Thou has heard our prayer..." said he in atremulous voice with folded hands. "Russia is saved. I thank Thee, OLord!" and he wept.CHAPTER XVIIIFrom the time he received this news to the end of the campaign allKutuzov's activity was directed toward restraining his troops, byauthority, by guile, and by entreaty, from useless attacks, maneuvers,or encounters with the perishing enemy. Dokhturov went to Malo-Yaroslavets, but Kutuzov lingered with the main army and gave orders forthe evacuation of Kaluga--a retreat beyond which town seemed to himquite possible.Everywhere Kutuzov retreated, but the enemy without waiting for hisretreat fled in the opposite direction.Napoleon's historians describe to us his skilled maneuvers at Tarutinoand Malo-Yaroslavets, and make conjectures as to what would havehappened had Napoleon been in time to penetrate into the rich southernprovinces.But not to speak of the fact that nothing prevented him from advancinginto those southern provinces (for the Russian army did not bar hisway), the historians forget that nothing could have saved his army, forthen already it bore within itself the germs of inevitable ruin. Howcould that army--which had found abundant supplies in Moscow and hadtrampled them underfoot instead of keeping them, and on arriving atSmolensk had looted provisions instead of storing them--how could thatarmy recuperate in Kaluga province, which was inhabited by Russians suchas those who lived in Moscow, and where fire had the same property ofconsuming what was set ablaze?That army could not recover anywhere. Since the battle of Borodino andthe pillage of Moscow it had borne within itself, as it were, thechemical elements of dissolution.The members of what had once been an army--Napoleon himself and all hissoldiers fled--without knowing whither, each concerned only to make hisescape as quickly as possible from this position, of the hopelessness ofwhich they were all more or less vaguely conscious.So it came about that at the council at Malo-Yaroslavets, when thegenerals pretending to confer together expressed various opinions, allmouths were closed by the opinion uttered by the simple-minded soldierMouton who, speaking last, said what they all felt: that the one thingneedful was to get away as quickly as possible; and no one, not evenNapoleon, could say anything against that truth which they allrecognized.But though they all realized that it was necessary to get away, therestill remained a feeling of shame at admitting that they must flee. Anexternal shock was needed to overcome that shame, and this shock came indue time. It was what the French called "le hourra de l'Empereur."The day after the council at Malo-Yaroslavets Napoleon rode out early inthe morning amid the lines of his army with his suite of marshals and anescort, on the pretext of inspecting the army and the scene of theprevious and of the impending battle. Some Cossacks on the prowl forbooty fell in with the Emperor and very nearly captured him. If theCossacks did not capture Napoleon then, what saved him was the verything that was destroying the French army, the booty on which theCossacks fell. Here as at Tarutino they went after plunder, leaving themen. Disregarding Napoleon they rushed after the plunder and Napoleonmanaged to escape.When les enfants du Don might so easily have taken the Emperor himselfin the midst of his army, it was clear that there was nothing for it butto fly as fast as possible along the nearest, familiar road. Napoleonwith his forty-year-old stomach understood that hint, not feeling hisformer agility and boldness, and under the influence of the fright theCossacks had given him he at once agreed with Mouton and issued orders--as the historians tell us--to retreat by the Smolensk road.That Napoleon agreed with Mouton, and that the army retreated, does notprove that Napoleon caused it to retreat, but that the forces whichinfluenced the whole army and directed it along the Mozhaysk (that is,the Smolensk) road acted simultaneously on him also.CHAPTER XIXA man in motion always devises an aim for that motion. To be able to goa thousand miles he must imagine that something good awaits him at theend of those thousand miles. One must have the prospect of a promisedland to have the strength to move.The promised land for the French during their advance had been Moscow,during their retreat it was their native land. But that native land wastoo far off, and for a man going a thousand miles it is absolutelynecessary to set aside his final goal and to say to himself: "Today Ishall get to a place twenty-five miles off where I shall rest and spendthe night," and during the first day's journey that resting placeeclipses his ultimate goal and attracts all his hopes and desires. Andthe impulses felt by a single person are always magnified in a crowd.For the French retreating along the old Smolensk road, the final goal--their native land--was too remote, and their immediate goal wasSmolensk, toward which all their desires and hopes, enormouslyintensified in the mass, urged them on. It was not that they knew thatmuch food and fresh troops awaited them in Smolensk, nor that they weretold so (on the contrary their superior officers, and Napoleon himself,knew that provisions were scarce there), but because this alone couldgive them strength to move on and endure their present privations. Soboth those who knew and those who did not know deceived themselves, andpushed on to Smolensk as to a promised land.Coming out onto the highroad the French fled with surprising energy andunheard-of rapidity toward the goal they had fixed on. Besides thecommon impulse which bound the whole crowd of French into one mass andsupplied them with a certain energy, there was another cause bindingthem together--their great numbers. As with the physical law of gravity,their enormous mass drew the individual human atoms to itself. In theirhundreds of thousands they moved like a whole nation.Each of them desired nothing more than to give himself up as a prisonerto escape from all this horror and misery; but on the one hand the forceof this common attraction to Smolensk, their goal, drew each of them inthe same direction; on the other hand an army corps could not surrenderto a company, and though the French availed themselves of everyconvenient opportunity to detach themselves and to surrender on theslightest decent pretext, such pretexts did not always occur. Their verynumbers and their crowded and swift movement deprived them of thatpossibility and rendered it not only difficult but impossible for theRussians to stop this movement, to which the French were directing alltheir energies. Beyond a certain limit no mechanical disruption of thebody could hasten the process of decomposition.A lump of snow cannot be melted instantaneously. There is a certainlimit of time in less than which no amount of heat can melt the snow. Onthe contrary the greater the heat the more solidified the remaining snowbecomes.Of the Russian commanders Kutuzov alone understood this. When the flightof the French army along the Smolensk road became well defined, whatKonovnitsyn had foreseen on the night of the eleventh of October beganto occur. The superior officers all wanted to distinguish themselves, tocut off, to seize, to capture, and to overthrow the French, and allclamored for action.Kutuzov alone used all his power (and such power is very limited in thecase of any commander-in-chief) to prevent an attack.He could not tell them what we say now: "Why fight, why block the road,losing our own men and inhumanly slaughtering unfortunate wretches? Whatis the use of that, when a third of their army has melted away on theroad from Moscow to Vyazma without any battle?" But drawing from hisaged wisdom what they could understand, he told them of the goldenbridge, and they laughed at and slandered him, flinging themselves on,rending and exulting over the dying beast.Ermolov, Miloradovich, Platov, and others in proximity to the Frenchnear Vyazma could not resist their desire to cut off and break up twoFrench corps, and by way of reporting their intention to Kutuzov theysent him a blank sheet of paper in an envelope.And try as Kutuzov might to restrain the troops, our men attacked,trying to bar the road. Infantry regiments, we are told, advanced to theattack with music and with drums beating, and killed and lost thousandsof men.But they did not cut off or overthrow anybody and the French army,closing up more firmly at the danger, continued, while steadily meltingaway, to pursue its fatal path to Smolensk.BOOK FOURTEEN: 1812CHAPTER IThe Battle of Borodino, with the occupation of Moscow that followed itand the flight of the French without further conflicts, is one of themost instructive phenomena in history.All historians agree that the external activity of states and nations intheir conflicts with one another is expressed in wars, and that as adirect result of greater or less success in war the political strengthof states and nations increases or decreases.Strange as may be the historical account of how some king or emperor,having quarreled with another, collects an army, fights his enemy'sarmy, gains a victory by killing three, five, or ten thousand men, andsubjugates a kingdom and an entire nation of several millions, all thefacts of history (as far as we know it) confirm the truth of thestatement that the greater or lesser success of one army against anotheris the cause, or at least an essential indication, of an increase ordecrease in the strength of the nation--even though it is unintelligiblewhy the defeat of an army--a hundredth part of a nation--should obligethat whole nation to submit. An army gains a victory, and at once therights of the conquering nation have increased to the detriment of thedefeated. An army has suffered defeat, and at once a people loses itsrights in proportion to the severity of the reverse, and if its armysuffers a complete defeat the nation is quite subjugated.So according to history it has been found from the most ancient times,and so it is to our own day. All Napoleon's wars serve to confirm thisrule. In proportion to the defeat of the Austrian army Austria loses itsrights, and the rights and the strength of France increase. Thevictories of the French at Jena and Auerstadt destroy the independentexistence of Prussia.But then, in 1812, the French gain a victory near Moscow. Moscow istaken and after that, with no further battles, it is not Russia thatceases to exist, but the French army of six hundred thousand, and thenNapoleonic France itself. To strain the facts to fit the rules ofhistory: to say that the field of battle at Borodino remained in thehands of the Russians, or that after Moscow there were other battlesthat destroyed Napoleon's army, is impossible.After the French victory at Borodino there was no general engagement norany that were at all serious, yet the French army ceased to exist. Whatdoes this mean? If it were an example taken from the history of China,we might say that it was not an historic phenomenon (which is thehistorians' usual expedient when anything does not fit their standards);if the matter concerned some brief conflict in which only a small numberof troops took part, we might treat it as an exception; but this eventoccurred before our fathers' eyes, and for them it was a question of thelife or death of their fatherland, and it happened in the greatest ofall known wars.The period of the campaign of 1812 from the battle of Borodino to theexpulsion of the French proved that the winning of a battle does notproduce a conquest and is not even an invariable indication of conquest;it proved that the force which decides the fate of peoples lies not inthe conquerors, nor even in armies and battles, but in something else.The French historians, describing the condition of the French armybefore it left Moscow, affirm that all was in order in the Grand Army,except the cavalry, the artillery, and the transport--there was noforage for the horses or the cattle. That was a misfortune no one couldremedy, for the peasants of the district burned their hay rather thanlet the French have it.The victory gained did not bring the usual results because the peasantsKarp and Vlas (who after the French had evacuated Moscow drove in theircarts to pillage the town, and in general personally failed to manifestany heroic feelings), and the whole innumerable multitude of suchpeasants, did not bring their hay to Moscow for the high price offeredthem, but burned it instead.Let us imagine two men who have come out to fight a duel with rapiersaccording to all the rules of the art of fencing. The fencing has goneon for some time; suddenly one of the combatants, feeling himselfwounded and understanding that the matter is no joke but concerns hislife, throws down his rapier, and seizing the first cudgel that comes tohand begins to brandish it. Then let us imagine that the combatant whoso sensibly employed the best and simplest means to attain his end wasat the same time influenced by traditions of chivalry and, desiring toconceal the facts of the case, insisted that he had gained his victorywith the rapier according to all the rules of art. One can imagine whatconfusion and obscurity would result from such an account of the duel.The fencer who demanded a contest according to the rules of fencing wasthe French army; his opponent who threw away the rapier and snatched upthe cudgel was the Russian people; those who try to explain the matteraccording to the rules of fencing are the historians who have describedthe event.After the burning of Smolensk a war began which did not follow anyprevious traditions of war. The burning of towns and villages, theretreats after battles, the blow dealt at Borodino and the renewedretreat, the burning of Moscow, the capture of marauders, the seizure oftransports, and the guerrilla war were all departures from the rules.Napoleon felt this, and from the time he took up the correct fencingattitude in Moscow and instead of his opponent's rapier saw a cudgelraised above his head, he did not cease to complain to Kutuzov and tothe Emperor Alexander that the war was being carried on contrary to allthe rules--as if there were any rules for killing people. In spite ofthe complaints of the French as to the nonobservance of the rules, inspite of the fact that to some highly placed Russians it seemed ratherdisgraceful to fight with a cudgel and they wanted to assume a pose enquarte or en tierce according to all the rules, and to make an adroitthrust en prime, and so on--the cudgel of the people's war was liftedwith all its menacing and majestic strength, and without consultinganyone's tastes or rules and regardless of anything else, it rose andfell with stupid simplicity, but consistently, and belabored the Frenchtill the whole invasion had perished.And it is well for a people who do not--as the French did in 1813--salute according to all the rules of art, and, presenting the hilt oftheir rapier gracefully and politely, hand it to their magnanimousconqueror, but at the moment of trial, without asking what rules othershave adopted in similar cases, simply and easily pick up the firstcudgel that comes to hand and strike with it till the feeling ofresentment and revenge in their soul yields to a feeling of contempt andcompassion.CHAPTER IIOne of the most obvious and advantageous departures from the so-calledlaws of war is the action of scattered groups against men pressedtogether in a mass. Such action always occurs in wars that take on anational character. In such actions, instead of two crowds opposing eachother, the men disperse, attack singly, run away when attacked bystronger forces, but again attack when opportunity offers. This was doneby the guerrillas in Spain, by the mountain tribes in the Caucasus, andby the Russians in 1812.People have called this kind of war "guerrilla warfare" and assume thatby so calling it they have explained its meaning. But such a war doesnot fit in under any rule and is directly opposed to a well-known ruleof tactics which is accepted as infallible. That rule says that anattacker should concentrate his forces in order to be stronger than hisopponent at the moment of conflict.Guerrilla war (always successful, as history shows) directly infringesthat rule.This contradiction arises from the fact that military science assumesthe strength of an army to be identical with its numbers. Militaryscience says that the more troops the greater the strength. Les grosbataillons ont toujours raison. ** Large battalions are always victorious.For military science to say this is like defining momentum in mechanicsby reference to the mass only: stating that momenta are equal or unequalto each other simply because the masses involved are equal or unequal.Momentum (quantity of motion) is the product of mass and velocity.In military affairs the strength of an army is the product of its massand some unknown x.Military science, seeing in history innumerable instances of the factthat the size of any army does not coincide with its strength and thatsmall detachments defeat larger ones, obscurely admits the existence ofthis unknown factor and tries to discover it--now in a geometricformation, now in the equipment employed, now, and most usually, in thegenius of the commanders. But the assignment of these various meaningsto the factor does not yield results which accord with the historicfacts.Yet it is only necessary to abandon the false view (adopted to gratifythe "heroes") of the efficacy of the directions issued in wartime bycommanders, in order to find this unknown quantity.That unknown quantity is the spirit of the army, that is to say, thegreater or lesser readiness to fight and face danger felt by all the mencomposing an army, quite independently of whether they are, or are not,fighting under the command of a genius, in two--or three-line formation,with cudgels or with rifles that repeat thirty times a minute. Men whowant to fight will always put themselves in the most advantageousconditions for fighting.The spirit of an army is the factor which multiplied by the mass givesthe resulting force. To define and express the significance of thisunknown factor--the spirit of an army--is a problem for science.This problem is only solvable if we cease arbitrarily to substitute forthe unknown x itself the conditions under which that force becomesapparent--such as the commands of the general, the equipment employed,and so on--mistaking these for the real significance of the factor, andif we recognize this unknown quantity in its entirety as being thegreater or lesser desire to fight and to face danger. Only then,expressing known historic facts by equations and comparing the relativesignificance of this factor, can we hope to define the unknown.Ten men, battalions, or divisions, fighting fifteen men, battalions, ordivisions, conquer--that is, kill or take captive--all the others, whilethemselves losing four, so that on the one side four and on the otherfifteen were lost. Consequently the four were equal to the fifteen, andtherefore 4x = 15y. Consequently x/y = 15/4. This equation does not giveus the value of the unknown factor but gives us a ratio between twounknowns. And by bringing variously selected historic units (battles,campaigns, periods of war) into such equations, a series of numberscould be obtained in which certain laws should exist and might bediscovered.The tactical rule that an army should act in masses when attacking, andin smaller groups in retreat, unconsciously confirms the truth that thestrength of an army depends on its spirit. To lead men forward underfire more discipline (obtainable only by movement in masses) is neededthan is needed to resist attacks. But this rule which leaves out ofaccount the spirit of the army continually proves incorrect and is inparticularly striking contrast to the facts when some strong rise orfall in the spirit of the troops occurs, as in all national wars.The French, retreating in 1812--though according to tactics they shouldhave separated into detachments to defend themselves--congregated into amass because the spirit of the army had so fallen that only the massheld the army together. The Russians, on the contrary, ought accordingto tactics to have attacked in mass, but in fact they split up intosmall units, because their spirit had so risen that separateindividuals, without orders, dealt blows at the French without needingany compulsion to induce them to expose themselves to hardships anddangers.CHAPTER IIIThe so-called partisan war began with the entry of the French intoSmolensk.Before partisan warfare had been officially recognized by thegovernment, thousands of enemy stragglers, marauders, and foragers hadbeen destroyed by the Cossacks and the peasants, who killed them off asinstinctively as dogs worry a stray mad dog to death. Denis Davydov,with his Russian instinct, was the first to recognize the value of thisterrible cudgel which regardless of the rules of military sciencedestroyed the French, and to him belongs the credit for taking the firststep toward regularizing this method of warfare.On August 24 Davydov's first partisan detachment was formed and thenothers were recognized. The further the campaign progressed the morenumerous these detachments became.The irregulars destroyed the great army piecemeal. They gathered thefallen leaves that dropped of themselves from that withered tree--theFrench army--and sometimes shook that tree itself. By October, when theFrench were fleeing toward Smolensk, there were hundreds of suchcompanies, of various sizes and characters. There were some that adoptedall the army methods and had infantry, artillery, staffs, and thecomforts of life. Others consisted solely of Cossack cavalry. There werealso small scratch groups of foot and horse, and groups of peasants andlandowners that remained unknown. A sacristan commanded one party whichcaptured several hundred prisoners in the course of a month; and therewas Vasilisa, the wife of a village elder, who slew hundreds of theFrench.The partisan warfare flamed up most fiercely in the latter days ofOctober. Its first period had passed: when the partisans themselves,amazed at their own boldness, feared every minute to be surrounded andcaptured by the French, and hid in the forests without unsaddling,hardly daring to dismount and always expecting to be pursued. By the endof October this kind of warfare had taken definite shape: it had becomeclear to all what could be ventured against the French and what couldnot. Now only the commanders of detachments with staffs, and movingaccording to rules at a distance from the French, still regarded manythings as impossible. The small bands that had started their activitieslong before and had already observed the French closely consideredthings possible which the commanders of the big detachments did not dareto contemplate. The Cossacks and peasants who crept in among the Frenchnow considered everything possible.On October 22, Denisov (who was one of the irregulars) was with hisgroup at the height of the guerrilla enthusiasm. Since early morning heand his party had been on the move. All day long he had been watchingfrom the forest that skirted the highroad a large French convoy ofcavalry baggage and Russian prisoners separated from the rest of thearmy, which--as was learned from spies and prisoners--was moving under astrong escort to Smolensk. Besides Denisov and Dolokhov (who also led asmall party and moved in Denisov's vicinity), the commanders of somelarge divisions with staffs also knew of this convoy and, as Denisovexpressed it, were sharpening their teeth for it. Two of the commandersof large parties--one a Pole and the other a German--sent invitations toDenisov almost simultaneously, requesting him to join up with theirdivisions to attack the convoy."No, bwother, I have gwown mustaches myself," said Denisov on readingthese documents, and he wrote to the German that, despite his heartfeltdesire to serve under so valiant and renowned a general, he had to forgothat pleasure because he was already under the command of the Polishgeneral. To the Polish general he replied to the same effect, informinghim that he was already under the command of the German.Having arranged matters thus, Denisov and Dolokhov intended, withoutreporting matters to the higher command, to attack and seize that convoywith their own small forces. On October 22 it was moving from thevillage of Mikulino to that of Shamshevo. To the left of the roadbetween Mikulino and Shamshevo there were large forests, extending insome places up to the road itself though in others a mile or more backfrom it. Through these forests Denisov and his party rode all day,sometimes keeping well back in them and sometimes coming to the veryedge, but never losing sight of the moving French. That morning,Cossacks of Denisov's party had seized and carried off into the foresttwo wagons loaded with cavalry saddles, which had stuck in the mud notfar from Mikulino where the forest ran close to the road. Since then,and until evening, the party had watched the movements of the Frenchwithout attacking. It was necessary to let the French reach Shamshevoquietly without alarming them and then, after joining Dolokhov who wasto come that evening to a consultation at a watchman's hut in the forestless than a mile from Shamshevo, to surprise the French at dawn, fallinglike an avalanche on their heads from two sides, and rout and capturethem all at one blow.In their rear, more than a mile from Mikulino where the forest cameright up to the road, six Cossacks were posted to report if any freshcolumns of French should show themselves.Beyond Shamshevo, Dolokhov was to observe the road in the same way, tofind out at what distance there were other French troops. They reckonedthat the convoy had fifteen hundred men. Denisov had two hundred, andDolokhov might have as many more, but the disparity of numbers did notdeter Denisov. All that he now wanted to know was what troops these wereand to learn that he had to capture a "tongue"--that is, a man from theenemy column. That morning's attack on the wagons had been made sohastily that the Frenchmen with the wagons had all been killed; only alittle drummer boy had been taken alive, and as he was a straggler hecould tell them nothing definite about the troops in that column.Denisov considered it dangerous to make a second attack for fear ofputting the whole column on the alert, so he sent Tikhon Shcherbaty, apeasant of his party, to Shamshevo to try and seize at least one of theFrench quartermasters who had been sent on in advance.CHAPTER IVIt was a warm rainy autumn day. The sky and the horizon were both thecolor of muddy water. At times a sort of mist descended, and thensuddenly heavy slanting rain came down.Denisov in a felt cloak and a sheepskin cap from which the rain ran downwas riding a thin thoroughbred horse with sunken sides. Like his horse,which turned its head and laid its ears back, he shrank from the drivingrain and gazed anxiously before him. His thin face with its short, thickblack beard looked angry.Beside Denisov rode an esaul, * Denisov's fellow worker, also in feltcloak and sheepskin cap, and riding a large sleek Don horse.* A captain of Cossacks.Esaul Lovayski the Third was a tall man as straight as an arrow, pale-faced, fair-haired, with narrow light eyes and with calm self-satisfaction in his face and bearing. Though it was impossible to say inwhat the peculiarity of the horse and rider lay, yet at first glance atthe esaul and Denisov one saw that the latter was wet and uncomfortableand was a man mounted on a horse, while looking at the esaul one sawthat he was as comfortable and as much at ease as always and that he wasnot a man who had mounted a horse, but a man who was one with his horse,a being consequently possessed of twofold strength.A little ahead of them walked a peasant guide, wet to the skin andwearing a gray peasant coat and a white knitted cap.A little behind, on a poor, small, lean Kirghiz mount with an enormoustail and mane and a bleeding mouth, rode a young officer in a blueFrench overcoat.Beside him rode an hussar, with a boy in a tattered French uniform andblue cap behind him on the crupper of his horse. The boy held on to thehussar with cold, red hands, and raising his eyebrows gazed about himwith surprise. This was the French drummer boy captured that morning.Behind them along the narrow, sodden, cutup forest road came hussars inthrees and fours, and then Cossacks: some in felt cloaks, some in Frenchgreatcoats, and some with horsecloths over their heads. The horses,being drenched by the rain, all looked black whether chestnut or bay.Their necks, with their wet, close-clinging manes, looked strangelythin. Steam rose from them. Clothes, saddles, reins, were all wet,slippery, and sodden, like the ground and the fallen leaves that strewedthe road. The men sat huddled up trying not to stir, so as to warm thewater that had trickled to their bodies and not admit the fresh coldwater that was leaking in under their seats, their knees, and at theback of their necks. In the midst of the outspread line of Cossacks twowagons, drawn by French horses and by saddled Cossack horses that hadbeen hitched on in front, rumbled over the tree stumps and branches andsplashed through the water that lay in the ruts.Denisov's horse swerved aside to avoid a pool in the track and bumpedhis rider's knee against a tree."Oh, the devil!" exclaimed Denisov angrily, and showing his teeth hestruck his horse three times with his whip, splashing himself and hiscomrades with mud.Denisov was out of sorts both because of the rain and also from hunger(none of them had eaten anything since morning), and yet more because hestill had no news from Dolokhov and the man sent to capture a "tongue"had not returned."There'll hardly be another such chance to fall on a transport as today.It's too risky to attack them by oneself, and if we put it off tillanother day one of the big guerrilla detachments will snatch the preyfrom under our noses," thought Denisov, continually peering forward,hoping to see a messenger from Dolokhov.On coming to a path in the forest along which he could see far to theright, Denisov stopped."There's someone coming," said he.The esaul looked in the direction Denisov indicated."There are two, an officer and a Cossack. But it is not presupposablethat it is the lieutenant colonel himself," said the esaul, who was fondof using words the Cossacks did not know.The approaching riders having descended a decline were no longervisible, but they reappeared a few minutes later. In front, at a wearygallop and using his leather whip, rode an officer, disheveled anddrenched, whose trousers had worked up to above his knees. Behind him,standing in the stirrups, trotted a Cossack. The officer, a very younglad with a broad rosy face and keen merry eyes, galloped up to Denisovand handed him a sodden envelope."From the general," said the officer. "Please excuse its not being quitedry."Denisov, frowning, took the envelope and opened it."There, they kept telling us: 'It's dangerous, it's dangerous,'" saidthe officer, addressing the esaul while Denisov was reading thedispatch. "But Komarov and I"--he pointed to the Cossack--"wereprepared. We have each of us two pistols.... But what's this?" he asked,noticing the French drummer boy. "A prisoner? You've already been inaction? May I speak to him?""Wostov! Petya!" exclaimed Denisov, having run through the dispatch."Why didn't you say who you were?" and turning with a smile he held outhis hand to the lad.The officer was Petya Rostov.All the way Petya had been preparing himself to behave with Denisov asbefitted a grownup man and an officer--without hinting at their previousacquaintance. But as soon as Denisov smiled at him Petya brightened up,blushed with pleasure, forgot the official manner he had beenrehearsing, and began telling him how he had already been in a battlenear Vyazma and how a certain hussar had distinguished himself there."Well, I am glad to see you," Denisov interrupted him, and his faceagain assumed its anxious expression."Michael Feoklitych," said he to the esaul, "this is again fwom thatGerman, you know. He"--he indicated Petya--"is serving under him."And Denisov told the esaul that the dispatch just delivered was arepetition of the German general's demand that he should join forceswith him for an attack on the transport."If we don't take it tomowwow, he'll snatch it fwom under our noses," headded.While Denisov was talking to the esaul, Petya--abashed by Denisov's coldtone and supposing that it was due to the condition of his trousers--furtively tried to pull them down under his greatcoat so that no oneshould notice it, while maintaining as martial an air as possible."Will there be any orders, your honor?" he asked Denisov, holding hishand at the salute and resuming the game of adjutant and general forwhich he had prepared himself, "or shall I remain with your honor?""Orders?" Denisov repeated thoughtfully. "But can you stay tilltomowwow?""Oh, please... May I stay with you?" cried Petya."But, just what did the genewal tell you? To weturn at once?" askedDenisov.Petya blushed."He gave me no instructions. I think I could?" he returned, inquiringly."Well, all wight," said Denisov.And turning to his men he directed a party to go on to the halting placearranged near the watchman's hut in the forest, and told the officer onthe Kirghiz horse (who performed the duties of an adjutant) to go andfind out where Dolokhov was and whether he would come that evening.Denisov himself intended going with the esaul and Petya to the edge ofthe forest where it reached out to Shamshevo, to have a look at the partof the French bivouac they were to attack next day."Well, old fellow," said he to the peasant guide, "lead us toShamshevo."Denisov, Petya, and the esaul, accompanied by some Cossacks and thehussar who had the prisoner, rode to the left across a ravine to theedge of the forest.CHAPTER VThe rain had stopped, and only the mist was falling and drops from thetrees. Denisov, the esaul, and Petya rode silently, following thepeasant in the knitted cap who, stepping lightly with outturned toes andmoving noiselessly in his bast shoes over the roots and wet leaves,silently led them to the edge of the forest.He ascended an incline, stopped, looked about him, and advanced to wherethe screen of trees was less dense. On reaching a large oak tree thathad not yet shed its leaves, he stopped and beckoned mysteriously tothem with his hand.Denisov and Petya rode up to him. From the spot where the peasant wasstanding they could see the French. Immediately beyond the forest, on adownward slope, lay a field of spring rye. To the right, beyond a steepravine, was a small village and a landowner's house with a broken roof.In the village, in the house, in the garden, by the well, by the pond,over all the rising ground, and all along the road uphill from thebridge leading to the village, not more than five hundred yards away,crowds of men could be seen through the shimmering mist. Their un-Russian shouting at their horses which were straining uphill with thecarts, and their calls to one another, could be clearly heard."Bwing the prisoner here," said Denisov in a low voice, not taking hiseyes off the French.A Cossack dismounted, lifted the boy down, and took him to Denisov.Pointing to the French troops, Denisov asked him what these and those ofthem were. The boy, thrusting his cold hands into his pockets andlifting his eyebrows, looked at Denisov in affright, but in spite of anevident desire to say all he knew gave confused answers, merelyassenting to everything Denisov asked him. Denisov turned away from himfrowning and addressed the esaul, conveying his own conjectures to him.Petya, rapidly turning his head, looked now at the drummer boy, now atDenisov, now at the esaul, and now at the French in the village andalong the road, trying not to miss anything of importance."Whether Dolokhov comes or not, we must seize it, eh?" said Denisov witha merry sparkle in his eyes."It is a very suitable spot," said the esaul."We'll send the infantwy down by the swamps," Denisov continued."They'll cweep up to the garden; you'll wide up fwom there with theCossacks"--he pointed to a spot in the forest beyond the village--"and Iwith my hussars fwom here. And at the signal shot...""The hollow is impassable--there's a swamp there," said the esaul. "Thehorses would sink. We must ride round more to the left...."While they were talking in undertones the crack of a shot sounded fromthe low ground by the pond, a puff of white smoke appeared, thenanother, and the sound of hundreds of seemingly merry French voicesshouting together came up from the slope. For a moment Denisov and theesaul drew back. They were so near that they thought they were the causeof the firing and shouting. But the firing and shouting did not relateto them. Down below, a man wearing something red was running through themarsh. The French were evidently firing and shouting at him."Why, that's our Tikhon," said the esaul."So it is! It is!""The wascal!" said Denisov."He'll get away!" said the esaul, screwing up his eyes.The man whom they called Tikhon, having run to the stream, plunged in sothat the water splashed in the air, and, having disappeared for aninstant, scrambled out on all fours, all black with the wet, and ran on.The French who had been pursuing him stopped."Smart, that!" said the esaul."What a beast!" said Denisov with his former look of vexation. "What hashe been doing all this time?""Who is he?" asked Petya."He's our plastun. I sent him to capture a 'tongue.'""Oh, yes," said Petya, nodding at the first words Denisov uttered as ifhe understood it all, though he really did not understand anything ofit.Tikhon Shcherbaty was one of the most indispensable men in their band.He was a peasant from Pokrovsk, near the river Gzhat. When Denisov hadcome to Pokrovsk at the beginning of his operations and had as usualsummoned the village elder and asked him what he knew about the French,the elder, as though shielding himself, had replied, as all villageelders did, that he had neither seen nor heard anything of them. Butwhen Denisov explained that his purpose was to kill the French, andasked if no French had strayed that way, the elder replied that some"more-orderers" had really been at their village, but that TikhonShcherbaty was the only man who dealt with such matters. Denisov hadTikhon called and, having praised him for his activity, said a few wordsin the elder's presence about loyalty to the Tsar and the country andthe hatred of the French that all sons of the fatherland should cherish."We don't do the French any harm," said Tikhon, evidently frightened byDenisov's words. "We only fooled about with the lads for fun, you know!We killed a score or so of 'more-orderers,' but we did no harm else..."Next day when Denisov had left Pokrovsk, having quite forgotten aboutthis peasant, it was reported to him that Tikhon had attached himself totheir party and asked to be allowed to remain with it. Denisov gaveorders to let him do so.Tikhon, who at first did rough work, laying campfires, fetching water,flaying dead horses, and so on, soon showed a great liking and aptitudefor partisan warfare. At night he would go out for booty and alwaysbrought back French clothing and weapons, and when told to would bringin French captives also. Denisov then relieved him from drudgery andbegan taking him with him when he went out on expeditions and had himenrolled among the Cossacks.Tikhon did not like riding, and always went on foot, never laggingbehind the cavalry. He was armed with a musketoon (which he carriedrather as a joke), a pike and an ax, which latter he used as a wolf usesits teeth, with equal ease picking fleas out of its fur or crunchingthick bones. Tikhon with equal accuracy would split logs with blows atarm's length, or holding the head of the ax would cut thin little pegsor carve spoons. In Denisov's party he held a peculiar and exceptionalposition. When anything particularly difficult or nasty had to be done--to push a cart out of the mud with one's shoulders, pull a horse out ofa swamp by its tail, skin it, slink in among the French, or walk morethan thirty miles in a day--everybody pointed laughingly at Tikhon."It won't hurt that devil--he's as strong as a horse!" they said of him.Once a Frenchman Tikhon was trying to capture fired a pistol at him andshot him in the fleshy part of the back. That wound (which Tikhontreated only with internal and external applications of vodka) was thesubject of the liveliest jokes by the whole detachment--jokes in whichTikhon readily joined."Hallo, mate! Never again? Gave you a twist?" the Cossacks would banterhim. And Tikhon, purposely writhing and making faces, pretended to beangry and swore at the French with the funniest curses. The only effectof this incident on Tikhon was that after being wounded he seldombrought in prisoners.He was the bravest and most useful man in the party. No one found moreopportunities for attacking, no one captured or killed more Frenchmen,and consequently he was made the buffoon of all the Cossacks and hussarsand willingly accepted that role. Now he had been sent by Denisovovernight to Shamshevo to capture a "tongue." But whether because he hadnot been content to take only one Frenchman or because he had sleptthrough the night, he had crept by day into some bushes right among theFrench and, as Denisov had witnessed from above, had been detected bythem.CHAPTER VIAfter talking for some time with the esaul about next day's attack,which now, seeing how near they were to the French, he seemed to havedefinitely decided on, Denisov turned his horse and rode back."Now, my lad, we'll go and get dwy," he said to Petya.As they approached the watchhouse Denisov stopped, peering into theforest. Among the trees a man with long legs and long, swinging arms,wearing a short jacket, bast shoes, and a Kazan hat, was approachingwith long, light steps. He had a musketoon over his shoulder and an axstuck in his girdle. When he espied Denisov he hastily threw somethinginto the bushes, removed his sodden hat by its floppy brim, andapproached his commander. It was Tikhon. His wrinkled and pockmarkedface and narrow little eyes beamed with self-satisfied merriment. Helifted his head high and gazed at Denisov as if repressing a laugh."Well, where did you disappear to?" inquired Denisov."Where did I disappear to? I went to get Frenchmen," answered Tikhonboldly and hurriedly, in a husky but melodious bass voice."Why did you push yourself in there by daylight? You ass! Well, whyhaven't you taken one?""Oh, I took one all right," said Tikhon."Where is he?""You see, I took him first thing at dawn," Tikhon continued, spreadingout his flat feet with outturned toes in their bast shoes. "I took himinto the forest. Then I see he's no good and think I'll go and fetch alikelier one.""You see?... What a wogue--it's just as I thought," said Denisov to theesaul. "Why didn't you bwing that one?""What was the good of bringing him?" Tikhon interrupted hastily andangrily--"that one wouldn't have done for you. As if I don't know whatsort you want!""What a bwute you are!... Well?""I went for another one," Tikhon continued, "and I crept like thisthrough the wood and lay down." (He suddenly lay down on his stomachwith a supple movement to show how he had done it.) "One turned up and Igrabbed him, like this." (He jumped up quickly and lightly.) "'Comealong to the colonel,' I said. He starts yelling, and suddenly therewere four of them. They rushed at me with their little swords. So I wentfor them with my ax, this way: 'What are you up to?' says I. 'Christ bewith you!'" shouted Tikhon, waving his arms with an angry scowl andthrowing out his chest."Yes, we saw from the hill how you took to your heels through thepuddles!" said the esaul, screwing up his glittering eyes.Petya badly wanted to laugh, but noticed that they all refrained fromlaughing. He turned his eyes rapidly from Tikhon's face to the esaul'sand Denisov's, unable to make out what it all meant."Don't play the fool!" said Denisov, coughing angrily. "Why didn't youbwing the first one?"Tikhon scratched his back with one hand and his head with the other,then suddenly his whole face expanded into a beaming, foolish grin,disclosing a gap where he had lost a tooth (that was why he was calledShcherbaty--the gap-toothed). Denisov smiled, and Petya burst into apeal of merry laughter in which Tikhon himself joined."Oh, but he was a regular good-for-nothing," said Tikhon. "The clotheson him--poor stuff! How could I bring him? And so rude, your honor! Why,he says: 'I'm a general's son myself, I won't go!' he says.""You are a bwute!" said Denisov. "I wanted to question...""But I questioned him," said Tikhon. "He said he didn't know much.'There are a lot of us,' he says, 'but all poor stuff--only soldiers inname,' he says. 'Shout loud at them,' he says, 'and you'll take themall,'" Tikhon concluded, looking cheerfully and resolutely intoDenisov's eyes."I'll give you a hundwed sharp lashes--that'll teach you to play thefool!" said Denisov severely."But why are you angry?" remonstrated Tikhon, "just as if I'd never seenyour Frenchmen! Only wait till it gets dark and I'll fetch you any ofthem you want--three if you like.""Well, let's go," said Denisov, and rode all the way to the watchhousein silence and frowning angrily.Tikhon followed behind and Petya heard the Cossacks laughing with himand at him, about some pair of boots he had thrown into the bushes.When the fit of laughter that had seized him at Tikhon's words and smilehad passed and Petya realized for a moment that this Tikhon had killed aman, he felt uneasy. He looked round at the captive drummer boy and felta pang in his heart. But this uneasiness lasted only a moment. He feltit necessary to hold his head higher, to brace himself, and to questionthe esaul with an air of importance about tomorrow's undertaking, thathe might not be unworthy of the company in which he found himself.The officer who had been sent to inquire met Denisov on the way with thenews that Dolokhov was soon coming and that all was well with him.Denisov at once cheered up and, calling Petya to him, said: "Well, tellme about yourself."CHAPTER VIIPetya, having left his people after their departure from Moscow, joinedhis regiment and was soon taken as orderly by a general commanding alarge guerrilla detachment. From the time he received his commission,and especially since he had joined the active army and taken part in thebattle of Vyazma, Petya had been in a constant state of blissfulexcitement at being grown-up and in a perpetual ecstatic hurry not tomiss any chance to do something really heroic. He was highly delightedwith what he saw and experienced in the army, but at the same time italways seemed to him that the really heroic exploits were beingperformed just where he did not happen to be. And he was always in ahurry to get where he was not.When on the twenty-first of October his general expressed a wish to sendsomebody to Denisov's detachment, Petya begged so piteously to be sentthat the general could not refuse. But when dispatching him he recalledPetya's mad action at the battle of Vyazma, where instead of riding bythe road to the place to which he had been sent, he had galloped to theadvanced line under the fire of the French and had there twice fired hispistol. So now the general explicitly forbade his taking part in anyaction whatever of Denisov's. That was why Petya had blushed and grownconfused when Denisov asked him whether he could stay. Before they hadridden to the outskirts of the forest Petya had considered he must carryout his instructions strictly and return at once. But when he saw theFrench and saw Tikhon and learned that there would certainly be anattack that night, he decided, with the rapidity with which young peoplechange their views, that the general, whom he had greatly respected tillthen, was a rubbishy German, that Denisov was a hero, the esaul a hero,and Tikhon a hero too, and that it would be shameful for him to leavethem at a moment of difficulty.It was already growing dusk when Denisov, Petya, and the esaul rode upto the watchhouse. In the twilight saddled horses could be seen, andCossacks and hussars who had rigged up rough shelters in the glade andwere kindling glowing fires in a hollow of the forest where the Frenchcould not see the smoke. In the passage of the small watchhouse aCossack with sleeves rolled up was chopping some mutton. In the roomthree officers of Denisov's band were converting a door into a tabletop.Petya took off his wet clothes, gave them to be dried, and at once beganhelping the officers to fix up the dinner table.In ten minutes the table was ready and a napkin spread on it. On thetable were vodka, a flask of rum, white bread, roast mutton, and salt.Sitting at table with the officers and tearing the fat savory muttonwith his hands, down which the grease trickled, Petya was in an ecstaticchildish state of love for all men, and consequently of confidence thatothers loved him in the same way."So then what do you think, Vasili Dmitrich?" said he to Denisov. "It'sall right my staying a day with you?" And not waiting for a reply heanswered his own question: "You see I was told to find out--well, I amfinding out.... Only do let me into the very... into the chief... Idon't want a reward... But I want..."Petya clenched his teeth and looked around, throwing back his head andflourishing his arms."Into the vewy chief..." Denisov repeated with a smile."Only, please let me command something, so that I may really command..."Petya went on. "What would it be to you?... Oh, you want a knife?" hesaid, turning to an officer who wished to cut himself a piece of mutton.And he handed him his clasp knife. The officer admired it."Please keep it. I have several like it," said Petya, blushing."Heavens! I was quite forgetting!" he suddenly cried. "I have someraisins, fine ones; you know, seedless ones. We have a new sutler and hehas such capital things. I bought ten pounds. I am used to somethingsweet. Would you like some?..." and Petya ran out into the passage tohis Cossack and brought back some bags which contained about five poundsof raisins. "Have some, gentlemen, have some!""You want a coffeepot, don't you?" he asked the esaul. "I bought acapital one from our sutler! He has splendid things. And he's veryhonest, that's the chief thing. I'll be sure to send it to you. Orperhaps your flints are giving out, or are worn out--that happenssometimes, you know. I have brought some with me, here they are"--and heshowed a bag--"a hundred flints. I bought them very cheap. Please takeas many as you want, or all if you like...."Then suddenly, dismayed lest he had said too much, Petya stopped andblushed.He tried to remember whether he had not done anything else that wasfoolish. And running over the events of the day he remembered the Frenchdrummer boy. "It's capital for us here, but what of him? Where have theyput him? Have they fed him? Haven't they hurt his feelings?" he thought.But having caught himself saying too much about the flints, he was nowafraid to speak out."I might ask," he thought, "but they'll say: 'He's a boy himself and sohe pities the boy.' I'll show them tomorrow whether I'm a boy. Will itseem odd if I ask?" Petya thought. "Well, never mind!" and immediately,blushing and looking anxiously at the officers to see if they appearedironical, he said:"May I call in that boy who was taken prisoner and give him something toeat?... Perhaps...""Yes, he's a poor little fellow," said Denisov, who evidently sawnothing shameful in this reminder. "Call him in. His name is VincentBosse. Have him fetched.""I'll call him," said Petya."Yes, yes, call him. A poor little fellow," Denisov repeated.Petya was standing at the door when Denisov said this. He slipped inbetween the officers, came close to Denisov, and said:"Let me kiss you, dear old fellow! Oh, how fine, how splendid!"And having kissed Denisov he ran out of the hut."Bosse! Vincent!" Petya cried, stopping outside the door."Who do you want, sir?" asked a voice in the darkness.Petya replied that he wanted the French lad who had been captured thatday."Ah, Vesenny?" said a Cossack.Vincent, the boy's name, had already been changed by the Cossacks intoVesenny (vernal) and into Vesenya by the peasants and soldiers. In boththese adaptations the reference to spring (vesna) matched the impressionmade by the young lad."He is warming himself there by the bonfire. Ho, Vesenya! Vesenya!--Vesenny!" laughing voices were heard calling to one another in thedarkness."He's a smart lad," said an hussar standing near Petya. "We gave himsomething to eat a while ago. He was awfully hungry!"The sound of bare feet splashing through the mud was heard in thedarkness, and the drummer boy came to the door."Ah, c'est vous!" said Petya. "Voulez-vous manger? N'ayez pas peur, onne vous fera pas de mal," * he added shyly and affectionately, touchingthe boy's hand. "Entrez, entrez." *(2)* "Ah, it's you! Do you want something to eat? Don't be afraid, theywon't hurt you."* (2) "Come in, come in.""Merci, monsieur," * said the drummer boy in a trembling almost childishvoice, and he began scraping his dirty feet on the threshold.* "Thank you, sir."There were many things Petya wanted to say to the drummer boy, but didnot dare to. He stood irresolutely beside him in the passage. Then inthe darkness he took the boy's hand and pressed it."Come in, come in!" he repeated in a gentle whisper. "Oh, what can I dofor him?" he thought, and opening the door he let the boy pass in first.When the boy had entered the hut, Petya sat down at a distance from him,considering it beneath his dignity to pay attention to him. But hefingered the money in his pocket and wondered whether it would seemridiculous to give some to the drummer boy.CHAPTER VIIIThe arrival of Dolokhov diverted Petya's attention from the drummer boy,to whom Denisov had had some mutton and vodka given, and whom he had haddressed in a Russian coat so that he might be kept with their band andnot sent away with the other prisoners. Petya had heard in the army manystories of Dolokhov's extraordinary bravery and of his cruelty to theFrench, so from the moment he entered the hut Petya did not take hiseyes from him, but braced himself up more and more and held his headhigh, that he might not be unworthy even of such company.Dolokhov's appearance amazed Petya by its simplicity.Denisov wore a Cossack coat, had a beard, had an icon of Nicholas theWonder-Worker on his breast, and his way of speaking and everything hedid indicated his unusual position. But Dolokhov, who in Moscow had worna Persian costume, had now the appearance of a most correct officer ofthe Guards. He was clean-shaven and wore a Guardsman's padded coat withan Order of St. George at his buttonhole and a plain forage cap setstraight on his head. He took off his wet felt cloak in a corner of theroom, and without greeting anyone went up to Denisov and beganquestioning him about the matter in hand. Denisov told him of thedesigns the large detachments had on the transport, of the message Petyahad brought, and his own replies to both generals. Then he told him allhe knew of the French detachment."That's so. But we must know what troops they are and their numbers,"said Dolokhov. "It will be necessary to go there. We can't start theaffair without knowing for certain how many there are. I like to workaccurately. Here now--wouldn't one of these gentlemen like to ride overto the French camp with me? I have brought a spare uniform.""I, I... I'll go with you!" cried Petya."There's no need for you to go at all," said Denisov, addressingDolokhov, "and as for him, I won't let him go on any account.""I like that!" exclaimed Petya. "Why shouldn't I go?""Because it's useless.""Well, you must excuse me, because... because... I shall go, and that'sall. You'll take me, won't you?" he said, turning to Dolokhov."Why not?" Dolokhov answered absently, scrutinizing the face of theFrench drummer boy. "Have you had that youngster with you long?" heasked Denisov."He was taken today but he knows nothing. I'm keeping him with me.""Yes, and where do you put the others?" inquired Dolokhov."Where? I send them away and take a weceipt for them," shouted Denisov,suddenly flushing. "And I say boldly that I have not a single man's lifeon my conscience. Would it be difficult for you to send thirty or thweehundwed men to town under escort, instead of staining--I speak bluntly--staining the honor of a soldier?""That kind of amiable talk would be suitable from this young count ofsixteen," said Dolokhov with cold irony, "but it's time for you to dropit.""Why, I've not said anything! I only say that I'll certainly go withyou," said Petya shyly."But for you and me, old fellow, it's time to drop these amenities,"continued Dolokhov, as if he found particular pleasure in speaking ofthis subject which irritated Denisov. "Now, why have you kept this lad?"he went on, swaying his head. "Because you are sorry for him! Don't weknow those 'receipts' of yours? You send a hundred men away, and thirtyget there. The rest either starve or get killed. So isn't it all thesame not to send them?"The esaul, screwing up his light-colored eyes, nodded approvingly."That's not the point. I'm not going to discuss the matter. I do notwish to take it on my conscience. You say they'll die. All wight. Onlynot by my fault!"Dolokhov began laughing."Who has told them not to capture me these twenty times over? But ifthey did catch me they'd string me up to an aspen tree, and with allyour chivalry just the same." He paused. "However, we must get to work.Tell the Cossack to fetch my kit. I have two French uniforms in it.Well, are you coming with me?" he asked Petya."I? Yes, yes, certainly!" cried Petya, blushing almost to tears andglancing at Denisov.While Dolokhov had been disputing with Denisov what should be done withprisoners, Petya had once more felt awkward and restless; but again hehad no time to grasp fully what they were talking about. "If grown-up,distinguished men think so, it must be necessary and right," thought he."But above all Denisov must not dare to imagine that I'll obey him andthat he can order me about. I will certainly go to the French camp withDolokhov. If he can, so can I!"And to all Denisov's persuasions, Petya replied that he too wasaccustomed to do everything accurately and not just anyhow, and that henever considered personal danger."For you'll admit that if we don't know for sure how many of them thereare... hundreds of lives may depend on it, while there are only two ofus. Besides, I want to go very much and certainly will go, so don'thinder me," said he. "It will only make things worse..."CHAPTER IXHaving put on French greatcoats and shakos, Petya and Dolokhov rode tothe clearing from which Denisov had reconnoitered the French camp, andemerging from the forest in pitch darkness they descended into thehollow. On reaching the bottom, Dolokhov told the Cossacks accompanyinghim to await him there and rode on at a quick trot along the road to thebridge. Petya, his heart in his mouth with excitement, rode by his side."If we're caught, I won't be taken alive! I have a pistol," whisperedhe."Don't talk Russian," said Dolokhov in a hurried whisper, and at thatvery moment they heard through the darkness the challenge: "Qui vive?" *and the click of a musket.* "Who goes there?"The blood rushed to Petya's face and he grasped his pistol."Lanciers du 6-me," * replied Dolokhov, neither hastening nor slackeninghis horse's pace.* "Lancers of the 6th Regiment."The black figure of a sentinel stood on the bridge."Mot d'ordre." ** "Password."Dolokhov reined in his horse and advanced at a walk."Dites donc, le colonel Gerard est ici?" * he asked.* "Tell me, is Colonel Gerard here?""Mot d'ordre," repeated the sentinel, barring the way and not replying."Quand un officier fait sa ronde, les sentinelles ne demandent pas lemot d'ordre..." cried Dolokhov suddenly flaring up and riding straightat the sentinel. "Je vous demande si le colonel est ici." ** "When an officer is making his round, sentinels don't ask him for thepassword.... I am asking you if the colonel is here."And without waiting for an answer from the sentinel, who had steppedaside, Dolokhov rode up the incline at a walk.Noticing the black outline of a man crossing the road, Dolokhov stoppedhim and inquired where the commander and officers were. The man, asoldier with a sack over his shoulder, stopped, came close up toDolokhov's horse, touched it with his hand, and explained simply and ina friendly way that the commander and the officers were higher up thehill to the right in the courtyard of the farm, as he called thelandowner's house.Having ridden up the road, on both sides of which French talk could beheard around the campfires, Dolokhov turned into the courtyard of thelandowner's house. Having ridden in, he dismounted and approached a bigblazing campfire, around which sat several men talking noisily.Something was boiling in a small cauldron at the edge of the fire and asoldier in a peaked cap and blue overcoat, lit up by the fire, waskneeling beside it stirring its contents with a ramrod."Oh, he's a hard nut to crack," said one of the officers who was sittingin the shadow at the other side of the fire."He'll make them get a move on, those fellows!" said another, laughing.Both fell silent, peering out through the darkness at the sound ofDolokhov's and Petya's steps as they advanced to the fire leading theirhorses."Bonjour, messieurs!" * said Dolokhov loudly and clearly.* "Good day, gentlemen."There was a stir among the officers in the shadow beyond the fire, andone tall, long-necked officer, walking round the fire, came up toDolokhov."Is that you, Clement?" he asked. "Where the devil...?" But, noticinghis mistake, he broke off short and, with a frown, greeted Dolokhov as astranger, asking what he could do for him.Dolokhov said that he and his companion were trying to overtake theirregiment, and addressing the company in general asked whether they knewanything of the 6th Regiment. None of them knew anything, and Petyathought the officers were beginning to look at him and Dolokhov withhostility and suspicion. For some seconds all were silent."If you were counting on the evening soup, you have come too late," saida voice from behind the fire with a repressed laugh.Dolokhov replied that they were not hungry and must push on farther thatnight.He handed the horses over to the soldier who was stirring the pot andsquatted down on his heels by the fire beside the officer with the longneck. That officer did not take his eyes from Dolokhov and again askedto what regiment he belonged. Dolokhov, as if he had not heard thequestion, did not reply, but lighting a short French pipe which he tookfrom his pocket began asking the officer in how far the road before themwas safe from Cossacks."Those brigands are everywhere," replied an officer from behind thefire.Dolokhov remarked that the Cossacks were a danger only to stragglerssuch as his companion and himself, "but probably they would not dare toattack large detachments?" he added inquiringly. No one replied."Well, now he'll come away," Petya thought every moment as he stood bythe campfire listening to the talk.But Dolokhov restarted the conversation which had dropped and beganputting direct questions as to how many men there were in the battalion,how many battalions, and how many prisoners. Asking about the Russianprisoners with that detachment, Dolokhov said:"A horrid business dragging these corpses about with one! It would bebetter to shoot such rabble," and burst into loud laughter, so strangethat Petya thought the French would immediately detect their disguise,and involuntarily took a step back from the campfire.No one replied a word to Dolokhov's laughter, and a French officer whomthey could not see (he lay wrapped in a greatcoat) rose and whisperedsomething to a companion. Dolokhov got up and called to the soldier whowas holding their horses."Will they bring our horses or not?" thought Petya, instinctivelydrawing nearer to Dolokhov.The horses were brought."Good evening, gentlemen," said Dolokhov.Petya wished to say "Good night" but could not utter a word. Theofficers were whispering together. Dolokhov was a long time mounting hishorse which would not stand still, then he rode out of the yard at afootpace. Petya rode beside him, longing to look round to see whether ornot the French were running after them, but not daring to.Coming out onto the road Dolokhov did not ride back across the opencountry, but through the village. At one spot he stopped and listened."Do you hear?" he asked. Petya recognized the sound of Russian voicesand saw the dark figures of Russian prisoners round their campfires.When they had descended to the bridge Petya and Dolokhov rode past thesentinel, who without saying a word paced morosely up and down it, thenthey descended into the hollow where the Cossacks awaited them."Well now, good-by. Tell Denisov, 'at the first shot at daybreak,'" saidDolokhov and was about to ride away, but Petya seized hold of him."Really!" he cried, "you are such a hero! Oh, how fine, how splendid!How I love you!""All right, all right!" said Dolokhov. But Petya did not let go of himand Dolokhov saw through the gloom that Petya was bending toward him andwanted to kiss him. Dolokhov kissed him, laughed, turned his horse, andvanished into the darkness.CHAPTER XHaving returned to the watchman's hut, Petya found Denisov in thepassage. He was awaiting Petya's return in a state of agitation,anxiety, and self-reproach for having let him go."Thank God!" he exclaimed. "Yes, thank God!" he repeated, listening toPetya's rapturous account. "But, devil take you, I haven't slept becauseof you! Well, thank God. Now lie down. We can still get a nap beforemorning.""But... no," said Petya, "I don't want to sleep yet. Besides I knowmyself, if I fall asleep it's finished. And then I am used to notsleeping before a battle."He sat awhile in the hut joyfully recalling the details of hisexpedition and vividly picturing to himself what would happen next day.Then, noticing that Denisov was asleep, he rose and went out of doors.It was still quite dark outside. The rain was over, but drops were stillfalling from the trees. Near the watchman's hut the black shapes of theCossacks' shanties and of horses tethered together could be seen. Behindthe hut the dark shapes of the two wagons with their horses beside themwere discernible, and in the hollow the dying campfire gleamed red. Notall the Cossacks and hussars were asleep; here and there, amid thesounds of falling drops and the munching of the horses near by, could beheard low voices which seemed to be whispering.Petya came out, peered into the darkness, and went up to the wagons.Someone was snoring under them, and around them stood saddled horsesmunching their oats. In the dark Petya recognized his own horse, whichhe called "Karabakh" though it was of Ukranian breed, and went up to it."Well, Karabakh! We'll do some service tomorrow," said he, sniffing itsnostrils and kissing it."Why aren't you asleep, sir?" said a Cossack who was sitting under awagon."No, ah... Likhachev--isn't that your name? Do you know I have only justcome back! We've been into the French camp."And Petya gave the Cossack a detailed account not only of his ride butalso of his object, and why he considered it better to risk his lifethan to act "just anyhow.""Well, you should get some sleep now," said the Cossack."No, I am used to this," said Petya. "I say, aren't the flints in yourpistols worn out? I brought some with me. Don't you want any? You canhave some."The Cossack bent forward from under the wagon to get a closer look atPetya."Because I am accustomed to doing everything accurately," said Petya."Some fellows do things just anyhow, without preparation, and thenthey're sorry for it afterwards. I don't like that.""Just so," said the Cossack."Oh yes, another thing! Please, my dear fellow, will you sharpen mysaber for me? It's got bl..." (Petya feared to tell a lie, and the sabernever had been sharpened.) "Can you do it?""Of course I can."Likhachev got up, rummaged in his pack, and soon Petya heard the warlikesound of steel on whetstone. He climbed onto the wagon and sat on itsedge. The Cossack was sharpening the saber under the wagon."I say! Are the lads asleep?" asked Petya."Some are, and some aren't--like us.""Well, and that boy?""Vesenny? Oh, he's thrown himself down there in the passage. Fast asleepafter his fright. He was that glad!"After that Petya remained silent for a long time, listening to thesounds. He heard footsteps in the darkness and a black figure appeared."What are you sharpening?" asked a man coming up to the wagon."Why, this gentleman's saber.""That's right," said the man, whom Petya took to be an hussar. "Was thecup left here?""There, by the wheel!"The hussar took the cup."It must be daylight soon," said he, yawning, and went away.Petya ought to have known that he was in a forest with Denisov'sguerrilla band, less than a mile from the road, sitting on a wagoncaptured from the French beside which horses were tethered, that underit Likhachev was sitting sharpening a saber for him, that the big darkblotch to the right was the watchman's hut, and the red blotch below tothe left was the dying embers of a campfire, that the man who had comefor the cup was an hussar who wanted a drink; but he neither knew norwaited to know anything of all this. He was in a fairy kingdom wherenothing resembled reality. The big dark blotch might really be thewatchman's hut or it might be a cavern leading to the very depths of theearth. Perhaps the red spot was a fire, or it might be the eye of anenormous monster. Perhaps he was really sitting on a wagon, but it mightvery well be that he was not sitting on a wagon but on a terribly hightower from which, if he fell, he would have to fall for a whole day or awhole month, or go on falling and never reach the bottom. Perhaps it wasjust the Cossack, Likhachev, who was sitting under the wagon, but itmight be the kindest, bravest, most wonderful, most splendid man in theworld, whom no one knew of. It might really have been that the hussarcame for water and went back into the hollow, but perhaps he had simplyvanished--disappeared altogether and dissolved into nothingness.Nothing Petya could have seen now would have surprised him. He was in afairy kingdom where everything was possible.He looked up at the sky. And the sky was a fairy realm like the earth.It was clearing, and over the tops of the trees clouds were swiftlysailing as if unveiling the stars. Sometimes it looked as if the cloudswere passing, and a clear black sky appeared. Sometimes it seemed as ifthe black spaces were clouds. Sometimes the sky seemed to be risinghigh, high overhead, and then it seemed to sink so low that one couldtouch it with one's hand.Petya's eyes began to close and he swayed a little.The trees were dripping. Quiet talking was heard. The horses neighed andjostled one another. Someone snored."Ozheg-zheg, Ozheg-zheg..." hissed the saber against the whetstone, andsuddenly Petya heard an harmonious orchestra playing some unknown,sweetly solemn hymn. Petya was as musical as Natasha and more so thanNicholas, but had never learned music or thought about it, and so themelody that unexpectedly came to his mind seemed to him particularlyfresh and attractive. The music became more and more audible. The melodygrew and passed from one instrument to another. And what was played wasa fugue--though Petya had not the least conception of what a fugue is.Each instrument--now resembling a violin and now a horn, but better andclearer than violin or horn--played its own part, and before it hadfinished the melody merged with another instrument that began almost thesame air, and then with a third and a fourth; and they all blended intoone and again became separate and again blended, now into solemn churchmusic, now into something dazzlingly brilliant and triumphant."Oh--why, that was in a dream!" Petya said to himself, as he lurchedforward. "It's in my ears. But perhaps it's music of my own. Well, goon, my music! Now!..."He closed his eyes, and, from all sides as if from a distance, soundsfluttered, grew into harmonies, separated, blended, and again allmingled into the same sweet and solemn hymn. "Oh, this is delightful! Asmuch as I like and as I like!" said Petya to himself. He tried toconduct that enormous orchestra."Now softly, softly die away!" and the sounds obeyed him. "Now fuller,more joyful. Still more and more joyful!" And from an unknown depth roseincreasingly triumphant sounds. "Now voices join in!" ordered Petya. Andat first from afar he heard men's voices and then women's. The voicesgrew in harmonious triumphant strength, and Petya listened to theirsurpassing beauty in awe and joy.With a solemn triumphal march there mingled a song, the drip from thetrees, and the hissing of the saber, "Ozheg-zheg-zheg..." and again thehorses jostled one another and neighed, not disturbing the choir butjoining in it.Petya did not know how long this lasted: he enjoyed himself all thetime, wondered at his enjoyment and regretted that there was no one toshare it. He was awakened by Likhachev's kindly voice."It's ready, your honor; you can split a Frenchman in half with it!"Petya woke up."It's getting light, it's really getting light!" he exclaimed.The horses that had previously been invisible could now be seen to theirvery tails, and a watery light showed itself through the bare branches.Petya shook himself, jumped up, took a ruble from his pocket and gave itto Likhachev; then he flourished the saber, tested it, and sheathed it.The Cossacks were untying their horses and tightening their saddlegirths."And here's the commander," said Likhachev.Denisov came out of the watchman's hut and, having called Petya, gaveorders to get ready.CHAPTER XIThe men rapidly picked out their horses in the semidarkness, tightenedtheir saddle girths, and formed companies. Denisov stood by thewatchman's hut giving final orders. The infantry of the detachmentpassed along the road and quickly disappeared amid the trees in the mistof early dawn, hundreds of feet splashing through the mud. The esaulgave some orders to his men. Petya held his horse by the bridle,impatiently awaiting the order to mount. His face, having been bathed incold water, was all aglow, and his eyes were particularly brilliant.Cold shivers ran down his spine and his whole body pulsed rhythmically."Well, is ev'wything weady?" asked Denisov. "Bwing the horses."The horses were brought. Denisov was angry with the Cossack because thesaddle girths were too slack, reproved him, and mounted. Petya put hisfoot in the stirrup. His horse by habit made as if to nip his leg, butPetya leaped quickly into the saddle unconscious of his own weight and,turning to look at the hussars starting in the darkness behind him, rodeup to Denisov."Vasili Dmitrich, entrust me with some commission! Please... for God'ssake...!" said he.Denisov seemed to have forgotten Petya's very existence. He turned toglance at him."I ask one thing of you," he said sternly, "to obey me and not shoveyourself forward anywhere."He did not say another word to Petya but rode in silence all the way.When they had come to the edge of the forest it was noticeably growinglight over the field. Denisov talked in whispers with the esaul and theCossacks rode past Petya and Denisov. When they had all ridden by,Denisov touched his horse and rode down the hill. Slipping onto theirhaunches and sliding, the horses descended with their riders into theravine. Petya rode beside Denisov, the pulsation of his body constantlyincreasing. It was getting lighter and lighter, but the mist still hiddistant objects. Having reached the valley, Denisov looked back andnodded to a Cossack beside him."The signal!" said he.The Cossack raised his arm and a shot rang out. In an instant the trampof horses galloping forward was heard, shouts came from various sides,and then more shots.At the first sound of trampling hoofs and shouting, Petya lashed hishorse and loosening his rein galloped forward, not heeding Denisov whoshouted at him. It seemed to Petya that at the moment the shot was firedit suddenly became as bright as noon. He galloped to the bridge.Cossacks were galloping along the road in front of him. On the bridge hecollided with a Cossack who had fallen behind, but he galloped on. Infront of him soldiers, probably Frenchmen, were running from right toleft across the road. One of them fell in the mud under his horse'sfeet.Cossacks were crowding about a hut, busy with something. From the midstof that crowd terrible screams arose. Petya galloped up, and the firstthing he saw was the pale face and trembling jaw of a Frenchman,clutching the handle of a lance that had been aimed at him."Hurrah!... Lads!... ours!" shouted Petya, and giving rein to hisexcited horse he galloped forward along the village street.He could hear shooting ahead of him. Cossacks, hussars, and raggedRussian prisoners, who had come running from both sides of the road,were shouting something loudly and incoherently. A gallant-lookingFrenchman, in a blue overcoat, capless, and with a frowning red face,had been defending himself against the hussars. When Petya galloped upthe Frenchman had already fallen. "Too late again!" flashed throughPetya's mind and he galloped on to the place from which the rapid firingcould be heard. The shots came from the yard of the landowner's house hehad visited the night before with Dolokhov. The French were making astand there behind a wattle fence in a garden thickly overgrown withbushes and were firing at the Cossacks who crowded at the gateway.Through the smoke, as he approached the gate, Petya saw Dolokhov, whoseface was of a pale-greenish tint, shouting to his men. "Go round! Waitfor the infantry!" he exclaimed as Petya rode up to him."Wait?... Hurrah-ah-ah!" shouted Petya, and without pausing a momentgalloped to the place whence came the sounds of firing and where thesmoke was thickest.A volley was heard, and some bullets whistled past, while others plashedagainst something. The Cossacks and Dolokhov galloped after Petya intothe gateway of the courtyard. In the dense wavering smoke some of theFrench threw down their arms and ran out of the bushes to meet theCossacks, while others ran down the hill toward the pond. Petya wasgalloping along the courtyard, but instead of holding the reins he wavedboth his arms about rapidly and strangely, slipping farther and fartherto one side in his saddle. His horse, having galloped up to a campfirethat was smoldering in the morning light, stopped suddenly, and Petyafell heavily on to the wet ground. The Cossacks saw that his arms andlegs jerked rapidly though his head was quite motionless. A bullet hadpierced his skull.After speaking to the senior French officer, who came out of the housewith a white handkerchief tied to his sword and announced that theysurrendered, Dolokhov dismounted and went up to Petya, who laymotionless with outstretched arms."Done for!" he said with a frown, and went to the gate to meet Denisovwho was riding toward him."Killed?" cried Denisov, recognizing from a distance the unmistakablylifeless attitude--very familiar to him--in which Petya's body waslying."Done for!" repeated Dolokhov as if the utterance of these wordsafforded him pleasure, and he went quickly up to the prisoners, who weresurrounded by Cossacks who had hurried up. "We won't take them!" hecalled out to Denisov.Denisov did not reply; he rode up to Petya, dismounted, and withtrembling hands turned toward himself the bloodstained, mud-bespatteredface which had already gone white."I am used to something sweet. Raisins, fine ones... take them all!" herecalled Petya's words. And the Cossacks looked round in surprise at thesound, like the yelp of a dog, with which Denisov turned away, walked tothe wattle fence, and seized hold of it.Among the Russian prisoners rescued by Denisov and Dolokhov was PierreBezukhov.CHAPTER XIIDuring the whole of their march from Moscow no fresh orders had beenissued by the French authorities concerning the party of prisoners amongwhom was Pierre. On the twenty-second of October that party was nolonger with the same troops and baggage trains with which it had leftMoscow. Half the wagons laden with hardtack that had traveled the firststages with them had been captured by Cossacks, the other half had goneon ahead. Not one of those dismounted cavalrymen who had marched infront of the prisoners was left; they had all disappeared. The artillerythe prisoners had seen in front of them during the first days was nowreplaced by Marshal Junot's enormous baggage train, convoyed byWestphalians. Behind the prisoners came a cavalry baggage train.From Vyazma onwards the French army, which had till then moved in threecolumns, went on as a single group. The symptoms of disorder that Pierrehad noticed at their first halting place after leaving Moscow had nowreached the utmost limit.The road along which they moved was bordered on both sides by deadhorses; ragged men who had fallen behind from various regimentscontinually changed about, now joining the moving column, now againlagging behind it.Several times during the march false alarms had been given and thesoldiers of the escort had raised their muskets, fired, and runheadlong, crushing one another, but had afterwards reassembled andabused each other for their causeless panic.These three groups traveling together--the cavalry stores, the convoy ofprisoners, and Junot's baggage train--still constituted a separate andunited whole, though each of the groups was rapidly melting away.Of the artillery baggage train which had consisted of a hundred andtwenty wagons, not more than sixty now remained; the rest had beencaptured or left behind. Some of Junot's wagons also had been capturedor abandoned. Three wagons had been raided and robbed by stragglers fromDavout's corps. From the talk of the Germans Pierre learned that alarger guard had been allotted to that baggage train than to theprisoners, and that one of their comrades, a German soldier, had beenshot by the marshal's own order because a silver spoon belonging to themarshal had been found in his possession.The group of prisoners had melted away most of all. Of the three hundredand thirty men who had set out from Moscow fewer than a hundred nowremained. The prisoners were more burdensome to the escort than even thecavalry saddles or Junot's baggage. They understood that the saddles andJunot's spoon might be of some use, but that cold and hungry soldiersshould have to stand and guard equally cold and hungry Russians whofroze and lagged behind on the road (in which case the order was toshoot them) was not merely incomprehensible but revolting. And theescort, as if afraid, in the grievous condition they themselves were in,of giving way to the pity they felt for the prisoners and so renderingtheir own plight still worse, treated them with particular morosenessand severity.At Dorogobuzh while the soldiers of the convoy, after locking theprisoners in a stable, had gone off to pillage their own stores, severalof the soldier prisoners tunneled under the wall and ran away, but wererecaptured by the French and shot.The arrangement adopted when they started, that the officer prisonersshould be kept separate from the rest, had long since been abandoned.All who could walk went together, and after the third stage Pierre hadrejoined Karataev and the gray-blue bandy-legged dog that had chosenKarataev for its master.On the third day after leaving Moscow Karataev again fell ill with thefever he had suffered from in the hospital in Moscow, and as he grewgradually weaker Pierre kept away from him. Pierre did not know why, butsince Karataev had begun to grow weaker it had cost him an effort to gonear him. When he did so and heard the subdued moaning with whichKarataev generally lay down at the halting places, and when he smelledthe odor emanating from him which was now stronger than before, Pierremoved farther away and did not think about him.While imprisoned in the shed Pierre had learned not with his intellectbut with his whole being, by life itself, that man is created forhappiness, that happiness is within him, in the satisfaction of simplehuman needs, and that all unhappiness arises not from privation but fromsuperfluity. And now during these last three weeks of the march he hadlearned still another new, consolatory truth--that nothing in this worldis terrible. He had learned that as there is no condition in which mancan be happy and entirely free, so there is no condition in which heneed be unhappy and lack freedom. He learned that suffering and freedomhave their limits and that those limits are very near together; that theperson in a bed of roses with one crumpled petal suffered as keenly ashe now, sleeping on the bare damp earth with one side growing chilledwhile the other was warming; and that when he had put on tight dancingshoes he had suffered just as he did now when he walked with bare feetthat were covered with sores--his footgear having long since fallen topieces. He discovered that when he had married his wife--of his own freewill as it had seemed to him--he had been no more free than now whenthey locked him up at night in a stable. Of all that he himselfsubsequently termed his sufferings, but which at the time he scarcelyfelt, the worst was the state of his bare, raw, and scab-covered feet.(The horseflesh was appetizing and nourishing, the saltpeter flavor ofthe gunpowder they used instead of salt was even pleasant; there was nogreat cold, it was always warm walking in the daytime, and at nightthere were the campfires; the lice that devoured him warmed his body.)The one thing that was at first hard to bear was his feet.After the second day's march Pierre, having examined his feet by thecampfire, thought it would be impossible to walk on them; but wheneverybody got up he went along, limping, and, when he had warmed up,walked without feeling the pain, though at night his feet were moreterrible to look at than before. However, he did not look at them now,but thought of other things.Only now did Pierre realize the full strength of life in man and thesaving power he has of transferring his attention from one thing toanother, which is like the safety valve of a boiler that allowssuperfluous steam to blow off when the pressure exceeds a certain limit.He did not see and did not hear how they shot the prisoners who laggedbehind, though more than a hundred perished in that way. He did notthink of Karataev who grew weaker every day and evidently would soonhave to share that fate. Still less did Pierre think about himself. Theharder his position became and the more terrible the future, the moreindependent of that position in which he found himself were the joyfuland comforting thoughts, memories, and imaginings that came to him.CHAPTER XIIIAt midday on the twenty-second of October Pierre was going uphill alongthe muddy, slippery road, looking at his feet and at the roughness ofthe way. Occasionally he glanced at the familiar crowd around him andthen again at his feet. The former and the latter were alike familiarand his own. The blue-gray bandy legged dog ran merrily along the sideof the road, sometimes in proof of its agility and self-satisfactionlifting one hind leg and hopping along on three, and then again going onall four and rushing to bark at the crows that sat on the carrion. Thedog was merrier and sleeker than it had been in Moscow. All around laythe flesh of different animals--from men to horses--in various stages ofdecomposition; and as the wolves were kept off by the passing men thedog could eat all it wanted.It had been raining since morning and had seemed as if at any moment itmight cease and the sky clear, but after a short break it began rainingharder than before. The saturated road no longer absorbed the water,which ran along the ruts in streams.Pierre walked along, looking from side to side, counting his steps inthrees, and reckoning them off on his fingers. Mentally addressing therain, he repeated: "Now then, now then, go on! Pelt harder!"It seemed to him that he was thinking of nothing, but far down and deepwithin him his soul was occupied with something important andcomforting. This something was a most subtle spiritual deduction from aconversation with Karataev the day before.At their yesterday's halting place, feeling chilly by a dying campfire,Pierre had got up and gone to the next one, which was burning better.There Platon Karataev was sitting covered up--head and all--with hisgreatcoat as if it were a vestment, telling the soldiers in hiseffective and pleasant though now feeble voice a story Pierre knew. Itwas already past midnight, the hour when Karataev was usually free ofhis fever and particularly lively. When Pierre reached the fire andheard Platon's voice enfeebled by illness, and saw his pathetic facebrightly lit up by the blaze, he felt a painful prick at his heart. Hisfeeling of pity for this man frightened him and he wished to go away,but there was no other fire, and Pierre sat down, trying not to look atPlaton."Well, how are you?" he asked."How am I? If we grumble at sickness, God won't grant us death," repliedPlaton, and at once resumed the story he had begun."And so, brother," he continued, with a smile on his pale emaciated faceand a particularly happy light in his eyes, "you see, brother..."Pierre had long been familiar with that story. Karataev had told it tohim alone some half-dozen times and always with a specially joyfulemotion. But well as he knew it, Pierre now listened to that tale as tosomething new, and the quiet rapture Karataev evidently felt as he toldit communicated itself also to Pierre. The story was of an old merchantwho lived a good and God-fearing life with his family, and who went onceto the Nizhni fair with a companion--a rich merchant.Having put up at an inn they both went to sleep, and next morning hiscompanion was found robbed and with his throat cut. A bloodstained knifewas found under the old merchant's pillow. He was tried, knouted, andhis nostrils having been torn off, "all in due form" as Karataev put it,he was sent to hard labor in Siberia."And so, brother" (it was at this point that Pierre came up), "ten yearsor more passed by. The old man was living as a convict, submitting as heshould and doing no wrong. Only he prayed to God for death. Well, onenight the convicts were gathered just as we are, with the old man amongthem. And they began telling what each was suffering for, and how theyhad sinned against God. One told how he had taken a life, another hadtaken two, a third had set a house on fire, while another had simplybeen a vagrant and had done nothing. So they asked the old man: 'Whatare you being punished for, Daddy?'--'I, my dear brothers,' said he, 'ambeing punished for my own and other men's sins. But I have not killedanyone or taken anything that was not mine, but have only helped mypoorer brothers. I was a merchant, my dear brothers, and had muchproperty. 'And he went on to tell them all about it in due order. 'Idon't grieve for myself,' he says, 'God, it seems, has chastened me.Only I am sorry for my old wife and the children,' and the old man beganto weep. Now it happened that in the group was the very man who hadkilled the other merchant. 'Where did it happen, Daddy?' he said. 'When,and in what month?' He asked all about it and his heart began to ache.So he comes up to the old man like this, and falls down at his feet!'You are perishing because of me, Daddy,' he says. 'It's quite true,lads, that this man,' he says, 'is being tortured innocently and fornothing! I,' he says, 'did that deed, and I put the knife under yourhead while you were asleep. Forgive me, Daddy,' he says, 'for Christ'ssake!'"Karataev paused, smiling joyously as he gazed into the fire, and he drewthe logs together."And the old man said, 'God will forgive you, we are all sinners in Hissight. I suffer for my own sins,' and he wept bitter tears. Well, andwhat do you think, dear friends?" Karataev continued, his facebrightening more and more with a rapturous smile as if what he now hadto tell contained the chief charm and the whole meaning of his story:"What do you think, dear fellows? That murderer confessed to theauthorities. 'I have taken six lives,' he says (he was a great sinner),'but what I am most sorry for is this old man. Don't let him sufferbecause of me.' So he confessed and it was all written down and thepapers sent off in due form. The place was a long way off, and whilethey were judging, what with one thing and another, filling in thepapers all in due form--the authorities I mean--time passed. The affairreached the Tsar. After a while the Tsar's decree came: to set themerchant free and give him a compensation that had been awarded. Thepaper arrived and they began to look for the old man. 'Where is the oldman who has been suffering innocently and in vain? A paper has come fromthe Tsar!' so they began looking for him," here Karataev's lower jawtrembled, "but God had already forgiven him--he was dead! That's how itwas, dear fellows!" Karataev concluded and sat for a long time silent,gazing before him with a smile.And Pierre's soul was dimly but joyfully filled not by the story itselfbut by its mysterious significance: by the rapturous joy that lit upKarataev's face as he told it, and the mystic significance of that joy.CHAPTER XIV"A vos places!" * suddenly cried a voice.* "To your places."A pleasant feeling of excitement and an expectation of something joyfuland solemn was aroused among the soldiers of the convoy and theprisoners. From all sides came shouts of command, and from the left camesmartly dressed cavalrymen on good horses, passing the prisoners at atrot. The expression on all faces showed the tension people feel at theapproach of those in authority. The prisoners thronged together and werepushed off the road. The convoy formed up."The Emperor! The Emperor! The Marshal! The Duke!" and hardly had thesleek cavalry passed, before a carriage drawn by six gray horses rattledby. Pierre caught a glimpse of a man in a three-cornered hat with atranquil look on his handsome, plump, white face. It was one of themarshals. His eye fell on Pierre's large and striking figure, and in theexpression with which he frowned and looked away Pierre thought hedetected sympathy and a desire to conceal that sympathy.The general in charge of the stores galloped after the carriage with ared and frightened face, whipping up his skinny horse. Several officersformed a group and some soldiers crowded round them. Their faces alllooked excited and worried."What did he say? What did he say?" Pierre heard them ask.While the marshal was passing, the prisoners had huddled together in acrowd, and Pierre saw Karataev whom he had not yet seen that morning. Hesat in his short overcoat leaning against a birch tree. On his face,besides the look of joyful emotion it had worn yesterday while tellingthe tale of the merchant who suffered innocently, there was now anexpression of quiet solemnity.Karataev looked at Pierre with his kindly round eyes now filled withtears, evidently wishing him to come near that he might say something tohim. But Pierre was not sufficiently sure of himself. He made as if hedid not notice that look and moved hastily away.When the prisoners again went forward Pierre looked round. Karataev wasstill sitting at the side of the road under the birch tree and twoFrenchmen were talking over his head. Pierre did not look round againbut went limping up the hill.From behind, where Karataev had been sitting, came the sound of a shot.Pierre heard it plainly, but at that moment he remembered that he hadnot yet finished reckoning up how many stages still remained toSmolensk--a calculation he had begun before the marshal went by. And heagain started reckoning. Two French soldiers ran past Pierre, one ofwhom carried a lowered and smoking gun. They both looked pale, and inthe expression on their faces--one of them glanced timidly at Pierre--there was something resembling what he had seen on the face of the youngsoldier at the execution. Pierre looked at the soldier and rememberedthat, two days before, that man had burned his shirt while drying it atthe fire and how they had laughed at him.Behind him, where Karataev had been sitting, the dog began to howl."What a stupid beast! Why is it howling?" thought Pierre.His comrades, the prisoner soldiers walking beside him, avoided lookingback at the place where the shot had been fired and the dog was howling,just as Pierre did, but there was a set look on all their faces.CHAPTER XVThe stores, the prisoners, and the marshal's baggage train stopped atthe village of Shamshevo. The men crowded together round the campfires.Pierre went up to the fire, ate some roast horseflesh, lay down with hisback to the fire, and immediately fell asleep. He again slept as he haddone at Mozhaysk after the battle of Borodino.Again real events mingled with dreams and again someone, he or another,gave expression to his thoughts, and even to the same thoughts that hadbeen expressed in his dream at Mozhaysk."Life is everything. Life is God. Everything changes and moves and thatmovement is God. And while there is life there is joy in consciousnessof the divine. To love life is to love God. Harder and more blessed thanall else is to love this life in one's sufferings, in innocentsufferings.""Karataev!" came to Pierre's mind.And suddenly he saw vividly before him a long-forgotten, kindly old manwho had given him geography lessons in Switzerland. "Wait a bit," saidthe old man, and showed Pierre a globe. This globe was alive--avibrating ball without fixed dimensions. Its whole surface consisted ofdrops closely pressed together, and all these drops moved and changedplaces, sometimes several of them merging into one, sometimes onedividing into many. Each drop tried to spread out and occupy as muchspace as possible, but others striving to do the same compressed it,sometimes destroyed it, and sometimes merged with it."That is life," said the old teacher."How simple and clear it is," thought Pierre. "How is it I did not knowit before?""God is in the midst, and each drop tries to expand so as to reflect Himto the greatest extent. And it grows, merges, disappears from thesurface, sinks to the depths, and again emerges. There now, Karataev hasspread out and disappeared. Do you understand, my child?" said theteacher."Do you understand, damn you?" shouted a voice, and Pierre woke up.He lifted himself and sat up. A Frenchman who had just pushed a Russiansoldier away was squatting by the fire, engaged in roasting a piece ofmeat stuck on a ramrod. His sleeves were rolled up and his sinewy,hairy, red hands with their short fingers deftly turned the ramrod. Hisbrown morose face with frowning brows was clearly visible by the glow ofthe charcoal."It's all the same to him," he muttered, turning quickly to a soldierwho stood behind him. "Brigand! Get away!"And twisting the ramrod he looked gloomily at Pierre, who turned awayand gazed into the darkness. A prisoner, the Russian soldier theFrenchman had pushed away, was sitting near the fire patting somethingwith his hand. Looking more closely Pierre recognized the blue-gray dog,sitting beside the soldier, wagging its tail."Ah, he's come?" said Pierre. "And Plat-" he began, but did not finish.Suddenly and simultaneously a crowd of memories awoke in his fancy--ofthe look Platon had given him as he sat under the tree, of the shotheard from that spot, of the dog's howl, of the guilty faces of the twoFrenchmen as they ran past him, of the lowered and smoking gun, and ofKarataev's absence at this halt--and he was on the point of realizingthat Karataev had been killed, but just at that instant, he knew notwhy, the recollection came to his mind of a summer evening he had spentwith a beautiful Polish lady on the veranda of his house in Kiev. Andwithout linking up the events of the day or drawing a conclusion fromthem, Pierre closed his eyes, seeing a vision of the country insummertime mingled with memories of bathing and of the liquid, vibratingglobe, and he sank into water so that it closed over his head.Before sunrise he was awakened by shouts and loud and rapid firing.French soldiers were running past him."The Cossacks!" one of them shouted, and a moment later a crowd ofRussians surrounded Pierre.For a long time he could not understand what was happening to him. Allaround he heard his comrades sobbing with joy."Brothers! Dear fellows! Darlings!" old soldiers exclaimed, weeping, asthey embraced Cossacks and hussars.The hussars and Cossacks crowded round the prisoners; one offered themclothes, another boots, and a third bread. Pierre sobbed as he sat amongthem and could not utter a word. He hugged the first soldier whoapproached him, and kissed him, weeping.Dolokhov stood at the gate of the ruined house, letting a crowd ofdisarmed Frenchmen pass by. The French, excited by all that hadhappened, were talking loudly among themselves, but as they passedDolokhov who gently switched his boots with his whip and watched themwith cold glassy eyes that boded no good, they became silent. On theopposite side stood Dolokhov's Cossack, counting the prisoners andmarking off each hundred with a chalk line on the gate."How many?" Dolokhov asked the Cossack."The second hundred," replied the Cossack."Filez, filez!" * Dolokhov kept saying, having adopted this expressionfrom the French, and when his eyes met those of the prisoners theyflashed with a cruel light.* "Get along, get along!"Denisov, bareheaded and with a gloomy face, walked behind some Cossackswho were carrying the body of Petya Rostov to a hole that had been dugin the garden.CHAPTER XVIAfter the twenty-eighth of October when the frosts began, the flight ofthe French assumed a still more tragic character, with men freezing, orroasting themselves to death at the campfires, while carriages withpeople dressed in furs continued to drive past, carrying away theproperty that had been stolen by the Emperor, kings, and dukes; but theprocess of the flight and disintegration of the French army went onessentially as before.From Moscow to Vyazma the French army of seventy-three thousand men notreckoning the Guards (who did nothing during the whole war but pillage)was reduced to thirty-six thousand, though not more than five thousandhad fallen in battle. From this beginning the succeeding terms of theprogression could be determined mathematically. The French army meltedaway and perished at the same rate from Moscow to Vyazma, from Vyazma toSmolensk, from Smolensk to the Berezina, and from the Berezina to Vilna--independently of the greater or lesser intensity of the cold, thepursuit, the barring of the way, or any other particular conditions.Beyond Vyazma the French army instead of moving in three columns huddledtogether into one mass, and so went on to the end. Berthier wrote to hisEmperor (we know how far commanding officers allow themselves to divergefrom the truth in describing the condition of an army) and this is whathe said:I deem it my duty to report to Your Majesty the condition of the variouscorps I have had occasion to observe during different stages of the lasttwo or three days' march. They are almost disbanded. Scarcely a quarterof the soldiers remain with the standards of their regiments, the othersgo off by themselves in different directions hoping to find food andescape discipline. In general they regard Smolensk as the place wherethey hope to recover. During the last few days many of the men have beenseen to throw away their cartridges and their arms. In such a state ofaffairs, whatever your ultimate plans may be, the interest of YourMajesty's service demands that the army should be rallied at Smolenskand should first of all be freed from ineffectives, such as dismountedcavalry, unnecessary baggage, and artillery material that is no longerin proportion to the present forces. The soldiers, who are worn out withhunger and fatigue, need these supplies as well as a few days' rest.Many have died these last days on the road or at the bivouacs. Thisstate of things is continually becoming worse and makes one fear thatunless a prompt remedy is applied the troops will no longer be undercontrol in case of an engagement.November 9: twenty miles from Smolensk.After staggering into Smolensk which seemed to them a promised land, theFrench, searching for food, killed one another, sacked their own stores,and when everything had been plundered fled farther.They all went without knowing whither or why they were going. Still lessdid that genius, Napoleon, know it, for no one issued any orders to him.But still he and those about him retained their old habits: wrotecommands, letters, reports, and orders of the day; called one anothersire, mon cousin, prince d'Eckmuhl, roi de Naples, and so on. But theseorders and reports were only on paper, nothing in them was acted uponfor they could not be carried out, and though they entitled one anotherMajesties, Highnesses, or Cousins, they all felt that they weremiserable wretches who had done much evil for which they had now to pay.And though they pretended to be concerned about the army, each wasthinking only of himself and of how to get away quickly and savehimself.CHAPTER XVIIThe movements of the Russian and French armies during the campaign fromMoscow back to the Niemen were like those in a game of Russianblindman's bluff, in which two players are blindfolded and one of themoccasionally rings a little bell to inform the catcher of hiswhereabouts. First he rings his bell fearlessly, but when he gets into atight place he runs away as quietly as he can, and often thinking toescape runs straight into his opponent's arms.At first while they were still moving along the Kaluga road, Napoleon'sarmies made their presence known, but later when they reached theSmolensk road they ran holding the clapper of their bell tight--andoften thinking they were escaping ran right into the Russians.Owing to the rapidity of the French flight and the Russian pursuit andthe consequent exhaustion of the horses, the chief means ofapproximately ascertaining the enemy's position--by cavalry scouting--was not available. Besides, as a result of the frequent and rapid changeof position by each army, even what information was obtained could notbe delivered in time. If news was received one day that the enemy hadbeen in a certain position the day before, by the third day whensomething could have been done, that army was already two days' marchfarther on and in quite another position.One army fled and the other pursued. Beyond Smolensk there were severaldifferent roads available for the French, and one would have thoughtthat during their stay of four days they might have learned where theenemy was, might have arranged some more advantageous plan andundertaken something new. But after a four days' halt the mob, with nomaneuvers or plans, again began running along the beaten track, neitherto the right nor to the left but along the old--the worst--road, throughKrasnoe and Orsha.Expecting the enemy from behind and not in front, the French separatedin their flight and spread out over a distance of twenty-four hours. Infront of them all fled the Emperor, then the kings, then the dukes. TheRussian army, expecting Napoleon to take the road to the right beyondthe Dnieper--which was the only reasonable thing for him to do--themselves turned to the right and came out onto the highroad atKrasnoe. And here as in a game of blindman's buff the French ran intoour vanguard. Seeing their enemy unexpectedly the French fell intoconfusion and stopped short from the sudden fright, but then theyresumed their flight, abandoning their comrades who were farther behind.Then for three days separate portions of the French army--first Murat's(the vice-king's), then Davout's, and then Ney's--ran, as it were, thegauntlet of the Russian army. They abandoned one another, abandoned alltheir heavy baggage, their artillery, and half their men, and fled,getting past the Russians by night by making semicircles to the right.Ney, who came last, had been busying himself blowing up the walls ofSmolensk which were in nobody's way, because despite the unfortunateplight of the French or because of it, they wished to punish the flooragainst which they had hurt themselves. Ney, who had had a corps of tenthousand men, reached Napoleon at Orsha with only one thousand men left,having abandoned all the rest and all his cannon, and having crossed theDnieper at night by stealth at a wooded spot.From Orsha they fled farther along the road to Vilna, still playing atblindman's buff with the pursuing army. At the Berezina they againbecame disorganized, many were drowned and many surrendered, but thosewho got across the river fled farther. Their supreme chief donned a furcoat and, having seated himself in a sleigh, galloped on alone,abandoning his companions. The others who could do so drove away too,leaving those who could not to surrender or die.CHAPTER XVIIIThis campaign consisted in a flight of the French during which they didall they could to destroy themselves. From the time they turned onto theKaluga road to the day their leader fled from the army, none of themovements of the crowd had any sense. So one might have thought thatregarding this period of the campaign the historians, who attributed theactions of the mass to the will of one man, would have found itimpossible to make the story of the retreat fit their theory. But no!Mountains of books have been written by the historians about thiscampaign, and everywhere are described Napoleon's arrangements, themaneuvers, and his profound plans which guided the army, as well as themilitary genius shown by his marshals.The retreat from Malo-Yaroslavets when he had a free road into a well-supplied district and the parallel road was open to him along whichKutuzov afterwards pursued him--this unnecessary retreat along adevastated road--is explained to us as being due to profoundconsiderations. Similarly profound considerations are given for hisretreat from Smolensk to Orsha. Then his heroism at Krasnoe isdescribed, where he is reported to have been prepared to accept battleand take personal command, and to have walked about with a birch stickand said:"J'ai assez fait l'empereur; il est temps de faire le general," * butnevertheless immediately ran away again, abandoning to its fate thescattered fragments of the army he left behind.* "I have acted the Emperor long enough; it is time to act the general."Then we are told of the greatness of soul of the marshals, especially ofNey--a greatness of soul consisting in this: that he made his way bynight around through the forest and across the Dnieper and escaped toOrsha, abandoning standards, artillery, and nine tenths of his men.And lastly, the final departure of the great Emperor from his heroicarmy is presented to us by the historians as something great andcharacteristic of genius. Even that final running away, described inordinary language as the lowest depth of baseness which every child istaught to be ashamed of--even that act finds justification in thehistorians' language.When it is impossible to stretch the very elastic threads of historicalratiocination any farther, when actions are clearly contrary to all thathumanity calls right or even just, the historians produce a savingconception of "greatness." "Greatness," it seems, excludes the standardsof right and wrong. For the "great" man nothing is wrong, there is noatrocity for which a "great" man can be blamed."C'est grand!" * say the historians, and there no longer exists eithergood or evil but only "grand" and "not grand." Grand is good, not grandis bad. Grand is the characteristic, in their conception, of somespecial animals called "heroes." And Napoleon, escaping home in a warmfur coat and leaving to perish those who were not merely his comradesbut were (in his opinion) men he had brought there, feels que c'estgrand, *(2) and his soul is tranquil.* "It is great."* (2) That it is great."Du sublime (he saw something sublime in himself) au ridicule il n'y aqu'un pas," * said he. And the whole world for fifty years has beenrepeating: "Sublime! Grand! Napoleon le Grand!" Du sublime au ridiculeil n'y a qu'un pas.* "From the sublime to the ridiculous is but a step."And it occurs to no one that to admit a greatness not commensurable withthe standard of right and wrong is merely to admit one's own nothingnessand immeasurable meanness.For us with the standard of good and evil given us by Christ, no humanactions are incommensurable. And there is no greatness where simplicity,goodness, and truth are absent.CHAPTER XIXWhat Russian, reading the account of the last part of the campaign of1812, has not experienced an uncomfortable feeling of regret,dissatisfaction, and perplexity? Who has not asked himself how it isthat the French were not all captured or destroyed when our three armiessurrounded them in superior numbers, when the disordered French, hungryand freezing, surrendered in crowds, and when (as the historians relate)the aim of the Russians was to stop the French, to cut them off, andcapture them all?How was it that the Russian army, which when numerically weaker than theFrench had given battle at Borodino, did not achieve its purpose when ithad surrounded the French on three sides and when its aim was to capturethem? Can the French be so enormously superior to us that when we hadsurrounded them with superior forces we could not beat them? How couldthat happen?History (or what is called by that name) replying to these questionssays that this occurred because Kutuzov and Tormasov and Chichagov, andthis man and that man, did not execute such and such maneuvers...But why did they not execute those maneuvers? And why if they wereguilty of not carrying out a prearranged plan were they not tried andpunished? But even if we admitted that Kutuzov, Chichagov, and otherswere the cause of the Russian failures, it is still incomprehensiblewhy, the position of the Russian army being what it was at Krasnoe andat the Berezina (in both cases we had superior forces), the French armywith its marshals, kings, and Emperor was not captured, if that was whatthe Russians aimed at.The explanation of this strange fact given by Russian militaryhistorians (to the effect that Kutuzov hindered an attack) is unfounded,for we know that he could not restrain the troops from attacking atVyazma and Tarutino.Why was the Russian army--which with inferior forces had withstood theenemy in full strength at Borodino--defeated at Krasnoe and the Berezinaby the disorganized crowds of the French when it was numericallysuperior?If the aim of the Russians consisted in cutting off and capturingNapoleon and his marshals--and that aim was not merely frustrated butall attempts to attain it were most shamefully baffled--then this lastperiod of the campaign is quite rightly considered by the French to be aseries of victories, and quite wrongly considered victorious by Russianhistorians.The Russian military historians in so far as they submit to claims oflogic must admit that conclusion, and in spite of their lyricalrhapsodies about valor, devotion, and so forth, must reluctantly admitthat the French retreat from Moscow was a series of victories forNapoleon and defeats for Kutuzov.But putting national vanity entirely aside one feels that such aconclusion involves a contradiction, since the series of Frenchvictories brought the French complete destruction, while the series ofRussian defeats led to the total destruction of their enemy and theliberation of their country.The source of this contradiction lies in the fact that the historiansstudying the events from the letters of the sovereigns and the generals,from memoirs, reports, projects, and so forth, have attributed to thislast period of the war of 1812 an aim that never existed, namely that ofcutting off and capturing Napoleon with his marshals and his army.There never was or could have been such an aim, for it would have beensenseless and its attainment quite impossible.It would have been senseless, first because Napoleon's disorganized armywas flying from Russia with all possible speed, that is to say, wasdoing just what every Russian desired. So what was the use of performingvarious operations on the French who were running away as fast as theypossibly could?Secondly, it would have been senseless to block the passage of men whosewhole energy was directed to flight.Thirdly, it would have been senseless to sacrifice one's own troops inorder to destroy the French army, which without external interferencewas destroying itself at such a rate that, though its path was notblocked, it could not carry across the frontier more than it actuallydid in December, namely a hundredth part of the original army.Fourthly, it would have been senseless to wish to take captive theEmperor, kings, and dukes--whose capture would have been in the highestdegree embarrassing for the Russians, as the most adroit diplomatists ofthe time (Joseph de Maistre and others) recognized. Still more senselesswould have been the wish to capture army corps of the French, when ourown army had melted away to half before reaching Krasnoe and a wholedivision would have been needed to convoy the corps of prisoners, andwhen our men were not always getting full rations and the prisonersalready taken were perishing of hunger.All the profound plans about cutting off and capturing Napoleon and hisarmy were like the plan of a market gardener who, when driving out ofhis garden a cow that had trampled down the beds he had planted, shouldrun to the gate and hit the cow on the head. The only thing to be saidin excuse of that gardener would be that he was very angry. But not eventhat could be said for those who drew up this project, for it was notthey who had suffered from the trampled beds.But besides the fact that cutting off Napoleon with his army would havebeen senseless, it was impossible.It was impossible first because--as experience shows that a three-milemovement of columns on a battlefield never coincides with the plans--theprobability of Chichagov, Kutuzov, and Wittgenstein effecting a junctionon time at an appointed place was so remote as to be tantamount toimpossibility, as in fact thought Kutuzov, who when he received the planremarked that diversions planned over great distances do not yield thedesired results.Secondly it was impossible, because to paralyze the momentum with whichNapoleon's army was retiring, incomparably greater forces than theRussians possessed would have been required.Thirdly it was impossible, because the military term "to cut off" has nomeaning. One can cut off a slice of bread, but not an army. To cut offan army--to bar its road--is quite impossible, for there is alwaysplenty of room to avoid capture and there is the night when nothing canbe seen, as the military scientists might convince themselves by theexample of Krasnoe and of the Berezina. It is only possible to captureprisoners if they agree to be captured, just as it is only possible tocatch a swallow if it settles on one's hand. Men can only be takenprisoners if they surrender according to the rules of strategy andtactics, as the Germans did. But the French troops quite rightly did notconsider that this suited them, since death by hunger and cold awaitedthem in flight or captivity alike.Fourthly and chiefly it was impossible, because never since the worldbegan has a war been fought under such conditions as those that obtainedin 1812, and the Russian army in its pursuit of the French strained itsstrength to the utmost and could not have done more without destroyingitself.During the movement of the Russian army from Tarutino to Krasnoe it lostfifty thousand sick or stragglers, that is a number equal to thepopulation of a large provincial town. Half the men fell out of the armywithout a battle.And it is of this period of the campaign--when the army lacked boots andsheepskin coats, was short of provisions and without vodka, and wascamping out at night for months in the snow with fifteen degrees offrost, when there were only seven or eight hours of daylight and therest was night in which the influence of discipline cannot bemaintained, when men were taken into that region of death wherediscipline fails, not for a few hours only as in a battle, but formonths, where they were every moment fighting death from hunger andcold, when half the army perished in a single month--it is of thisperiod of the campaign that the historians tell us how Miloradovichshould have made a flank march to such and such a place, Tormasov toanother place, and Chichagov should have crossed (more than knee-deep insnow) to somewhere else, and how so-and-so "routed" and "cut off" theFrench and so on and so on.The Russians, half of whom died, did all that could and should have beendone to attain an end worthy of the nation, and they are not to blamebecause other Russians, sitting in warm rooms, proposed that they shoulddo what was impossible.All that strange contradiction now difficult to understand between thefacts and the historical accounts only arises because the historiansdealing with the matter have written the history of the beautiful wordsand sentiments of various generals, and not the history of the events.To them the words of Miloradovich seem very interesting, and so do theirsurmises and the rewards this or that general received; but the questionof those fifty thousand men who were left in hospitals and in gravesdoes not even interest them, for it does not come within the range oftheir investigation.Yet one need only discard the study of the reports and general plans andconsider the movement of those hundreds of thousands of men who took adirect part in the events, and all the questions that seemed insolubleeasily and simply receive an immediate and certain solution.The aim of cutting off Napoleon and his army never existed except in theimaginations of a dozen people. It could not exist because it wassenseless and unattainable.The people had a single aim: to free their land from invasion. That aimwas attained in the first place of itself, as the French ran away, andso it was only necessary not to stop their flight. Secondly it wasattained by the guerrilla warfare which was destroying the French, andthirdly by the fact that a large Russian army was following the French,ready to use its strength in case their movement stopped.The Russian army had to act like a whip to a running animal. And theexperienced driver knew it was better to hold the whip raised as amenace than to strike the running animal on the head.BOOK FIFTEEN: 1812 - 13CHAPTER IWhen seeing a dying animal a man feels a sense of horror: substancesimilar to his own is perishing before his eyes. But when it is abeloved and intimate human being that is dying, besides this horror atthe extinction of life there is a severance, a spiritual wound, whichlike a physical wound is sometimes fatal and sometimes heals, but alwaysaches and shrinks at any external irritating touch.After Prince Andrew's death Natasha and Princess Mary alike felt this.Drooping in spirit and closing their eyes before the menacing cloud ofdeath that overhung them, they dared not look life in the face. Theycarefully guarded their open wounds from any rough and painful contact.Everything: a carriage passing rapidly in the street, a summons todinner, the maid's inquiry what dress to prepare, or worse still anyword of insincere or feeble sympathy, seemed an insult, painfullyirritated the wound, interrupting that necessary quiet in which theyboth tried to listen to the stern and dreadful choir that stillresounded in their imagination, and hindered their gazing into thosemysterious limitless vistas that for an instant had opened out beforethem.Only when alone together were they free from such outrage and pain. Theyspoke little even to one another, and when they did it was of veryunimportant matters.Both avoided any allusion to the future. To admit the possibility of afuture seemed to them to insult his memory. Still more carefully didthey avoid anything relating to him who was dead. It seemed to them thatwhat they had lived through and experienced could not be expressed inwords, and that any reference to the details of his life infringed themajesty and sacredness of the mystery that had been accomplished beforetheir eyes.Continued abstention from speech, and constant avoidance of everythingthat might lead up to the subject--this halting on all sides at theboundary of what they might not mention--brought before their minds withstill greater purity and clearness what they were both feeling.But pure and complete sorrow is as impossible as pure and complete joy.Princess Mary, in her position as absolute and independent arbiter ofher own fate and guardian and instructor of her nephew, was the first tobe called back to life from that realm of sorrow in which she had dweltfor the first fortnight. She received letters from her relations towhich she had to reply; the room in which little Nicholas had been putwas damp and he began to cough; Alpatych came to Yaroslavl with reportson the state of their affairs and with advice and suggestions that theyshould return to Moscow to the house on the Vozdvizhenka Street, whichhad remained uninjured and needed only slight repairs. Life did notstand still and it was necessary to live. Hard as it was for PrincessMary to emerge from the realm of secluded contemplation in which she hadlived till then, and sorry and almost ashamed as she felt to leaveNatasha alone, yet the cares of life demanded her attention and sheinvoluntarily yielded to them. She went through the accounts withAlpatych, conferred with Dessalles about her nephew, and gave orders andmade preparations for the journey to Moscow.Natasha remained alone and, from the time Princess Mary began makingpreparations for departure, held aloof from her too.Princess Mary asked the countess to let Natasha go with her to Moscow,and both parents gladly accepted this offer, for they saw their daughterlosing strength every day and thought that a change of scene and theadvice of Moscow doctors would be good for her."I am not going anywhere," Natasha replied when this was proposed toher. "Do please just leave me alone!" And she ran out of the room, withdifficulty refraining from tears of vexation and irritation rather thanof sorrow.After she felt herself deserted by Princes Mary and alone in her grief,Natasha spent most of the time in her room by herself, sitting huddledup feet and all in the corner of the sofa, tearing and twistingsomething with her slender nervous fingers and gazing intently andfixedly at whatever her eyes chanced to fall on. This solitude exhaustedand tormented her but she was in absolute need of it. As soon as anyoneentered she got up quickly, changed her position and expression, andpicked up a book or some sewing, evidently waiting impatiently for theintruder to go.She felt all the time as if she might at any moment penetrate that onwhich--with a terrible questioning too great for her strength--herspiritual gaze was fixed.One day toward the end of December Natasha, pale and thin, dressed in ablack woolen gown, her plaited hair negligently twisted into a knot, wascrouched feet and all in the corner of her sofa, nervously crumpling andsmoothing out the end of her sash while she looked at a corner of thedoor.She was gazing in the direction in which he had gone--to the other sideof life. And that other side of life, of which she had never beforethought and which had formerly seemed to her so far away and improbable,was now nearer and more akin and more comprehensible than this side oflife, where everything was either emptiness and desolation or sufferingand indignity.She was gazing where she knew him to be; but she could not imagine himotherwise than as he had been here. She now saw him again as he had beenat Mytishchi, at Troitsa, and at Yaroslavl.She saw his face, heard his voice, repeated his words and her own, andsometimes devised other words they might have spoken.There he is lying back in an armchair in his velvet cloak, leaning hishead on his thin pale hand. His chest is dreadfully hollow and hisshoulders raised. His lips are firmly closed, his eyes glitter, and awrinkle comes and goes on his pale forehead. One of his legs twitchesjust perceptibly, but rapidly. Natasha knows that he is struggling withterrible pain. "What is that pain like? Why does he have that pain? Whatdoes he feel? How does it hurt him?" thought Natasha. He noticed herwatching him, raised his eyes, and began to speak seriously:"One thing would be terrible," said he: "to bind oneself forever to asuffering man. It would be continual torture." And he looked searchinglyat her. Natasha as usual answered before she had time to think what shewould say. She said: "This can't go on--it won't. You will get well--quite well."She now saw him from the commencement of that scene and relived what shehad then felt. She recalled his long sad and severe look at those wordsand understood the meaning of the rebuke and despair in that protractedgaze."I agreed," Natasha now said to herself, "that it would be dreadful ifhe always continued to suffer. I said it then only because it would havebeen dreadful for him, but he understood it differently. He thought itwould be dreadful for me. He then still wished to live and feared death.And I said it so awkwardly and stupidly! I did not say what I meant. Ithought quite differently. Had I said what I thought, I should havesaid: even if he had to go on dying, to die continually before my eyes,I should have been happy compared with what I am now. Now there isnothing... nobody. Did he know that? No, he did not and never will knowit. And now it will never, never be possible to put it right." And nowhe again seemed to be saying the same words to her, only in herimagination Natasha this time gave him a different answer. She stoppedhim and said: "Terrible for you, but not for me! You know that for methere is nothing in life but you, and to suffer with you is the greatesthappiness for me," and he took her hand and pressed it as he had pressedit that terrible evening four days before his death. And in herimagination she said other tender and loving words which she might havesaid then but only spoke now: "I love thee!... thee! I love, love..."she said, convulsively pressing her hands and setting her teeth with adesperate effort...She was overcome by sweet sorrow and tears were already rising in hereyes; then she suddenly asked herself to whom she was saying this. Againeverything was shrouded in hard, dry perplexity, and again with astrained frown she peered toward the world where he was. And now, now itseemed to her she was penetrating the mystery.... But at the instantwhen it seemed that the incomprehensible was revealing itself to her aloud rattle of the door handle struck painfully on her ears. Dunyasha,her maid, entered the room quickly and abruptly with a frightened lookon her face and showing no concern for her mistress."Come to your Papa at once, please!" said she with a strange, excitedlook. "A misfortune... about Peter Ilynich... a letter," she finishedwith a sob.CHAPTER IIBesides a feeling of aloofness from everybody Natasha was feeling aspecial estrangement from the members of her own family. All of them--her father, mother, and Sonya--were so near to her, so familiar, socommonplace, that all their words and feelings seemed an insult to theworld in which she had been living of late, and she felt not merelyindifferent to them but regarded them with hostility. She heardDunyasha's words about Peter Ilynich and a misfortune, but did not graspthem."What misfortune? What misfortune can happen to them? They just livetheir own old, quiet, and commonplace life," thought Natasha.As she entered the ballroom her father was hurriedly coming out of hermother's room. His face was puckered up and wet with tears. He hadevidently run out of that room to give vent to the sobs that werechoking him. When he saw Natasha he waved his arms despairingly andburst into convulsively painful sobs that distorted his soft round face."Pe... Petya... Go, go, she... is calling..." and weeping like a childand quickly shuffling on his feeble legs to a chair, he almost fell intoit, covering his face with his hands.Suddenly an electric shock seemed to run through Natasha's whole being.Terrible anguish struck her heart, she felt a dreadful ache as ifsomething was being torn inside her and she were dying. But the pain wasimmediately followed by a feeling of release from the oppressiveconstraint that had prevented her taking part in life. The sight of herfather, the terribly wild cries of her mother that she heard through thedoor, made her immediately forget herself and her own grief.She ran to her father, but he feebly waved his arm, pointing to hermother's door. Princess Mary, pale and with quivering chin, came outfrom that room and taking Natasha by the arm said something to her.Natasha neither saw nor heard her. She went in with rapid steps, pausingat the door for an instant as if struggling with herself, and then ranto her mother.The countess was lying in an armchair in a strange and awkward position,stretching out and beating her head against the wall. Sonya and themaids were holding her arms."Natasha! Natasha!..." cried the countess. "It's not true... it's nottrue... He's lying... Natasha!" she shrieked, pushing those around heraway. "Go away, all of you; it's not true! Killed!... ha, ha, ha!...It's not true!"Natasha put one knee on the armchair, stooped over her mother, embracedher, and with unexpected strength raised her, turned her face towardherself, and clung to her."Mummy!... darling!... I am here, my dearest Mummy," she kept onwhispering, not pausing an instant.She did not let go of her mother but struggled tenderly with her,demanded a pillow and hot water, and unfastened and tore open hermother's dress."My dearest darling... Mummy, my precious!..." she whisperedincessantly, kissing her head, her hands, her face, and feeling her ownirrepressible and streaming tears tickling her nose and cheeks.The countess pressed her daughter's hand, closed her eyes, and becamequiet for a moment. Suddenly she sat up with unaccustomed swiftness,glanced vacantly around her, and seeing Natasha began to press herdaughter's head with all her strength. Then she turned toward herdaughter's face which was wincing with pain and gazed long at it."Natasha, you love me?" she said in a soft trustful whisper. "Natasha,you would not deceive me? You'll tell me the whole truth?"Natasha looked at her with eyes full of tears and in her look there wasnothing but love and an entreaty for forgiveness."My darling Mummy!" she repeated, straining all the power of her love tofind some way of taking on herself the excess of grief that crushed hermother.And again in a futile struggle with reality her mother, refusing tobelieve that she could live when her beloved boy was killed in the bloomof life, escaped from reality into a world of delirium.Natasha did not remember how that day passed nor that night, nor thenext day and night. She did not sleep and did not leave her mother. Herpersevering and patient love seemed completely to surround the countessevery moment, not explaining or consoling, but recalling her to life.During the third night the countess kept very quiet for a few minutes,and Natasha rested her head on the arm of her chair and closed her eyes,but opened them again on hearing the bedstead creak. The countess wassitting up in bed and speaking softly."How glad I am you have come. You are tired. Won't you have some tea?"Natasha went up to her. "You have improved in looks and grown moremanly," continued the countess, taking her daughter's hand."Mamma! What are you saying...""Natasha, he is no more, no more!"And embracing her daughter, the countess began to weep for the firsttime.CHAPTER IIIPrincess Mary postponed her departure. Sonya and the count tried toreplace Natasha but could not. They saw that she alone was able torestrain her mother from unreasoning despair. For three weeks Natasharemained constantly at her mother's side, sleeping on a lounge chair inher room, making her eat and drink, and talking to her incessantlybecause the mere sound of her tender, caressing tones soothed hermother.The mother's wounded spirit could not heal. Petya's death had torn fromher half her life. When the news of Petya's death had come she had beena fresh and vigorous woman of fifty, but a month later she left her rooma listless old woman taking no interest in life. But the same blow thatalmost killed the countess, this second blow, restored Natasha to life.A spiritual wound produced by a rending of the spiritual body is like aphysical wound and, strange as it may seem, just as a deep wound mayheal and its edges join, physical and spiritual wounds alike can yetheal completely only as the result of a vital force from within.Natasha's wound healed in that way. She thought her life was ended, buther love for her mother unexpectedly showed her that the essence oflife--love--was still active within her. Love awoke and so did life.Prince Andrew's last days had bound Princess Mary and Natasha together;this new sorrow brought them still closer to one another. Princess Maryput off her departure, and for three weeks looked after Natasha as ifshe had been a sick child. The last weeks passed in her mother's bedroomhad strained Natasha's physical strength.One afternoon noticing Natasha shivering with fever, Princess Mary tookher to her own room and made her lie down on the bed. Natasha lay down,but when Princess Mary had drawn the blinds and was going away shecalled her back."I don't want to sleep, Mary, sit by me a little.""You are tired--try to sleep.""No, no. Why did you bring me away? She will be asking for me.""She is much better. She spoke so well today," said Princess Mary.Natasha lay on the bed and in the semidarkness of the room scannedPrincess Mary's face."Is she like him?" thought Natasha. "Yes, like and yet not like. But sheis quite original, strange, new, and unknown. And she loves me. What isin her heart? All that is good. But how? What is her mind like? Whatdoes she think about me? Yes, she is splendid!""Mary," she said timidly, drawing Princess Mary's hand to herself,"Mary, you mustn't think me wicked. No? Mary darling, how I love you!Let us be quite, quite friends."And Natasha, embracing her, began kissing her face and hands, makingPrincess Mary feel shy but happy by this demonstration of her feelings.From that day a tender and passionate friendship such as exists onlybetween women was established between Princess Mary and Natasha. Theywere continually kissing and saying tender things to one another andspent most of their time together. When one went out the other becamerestless and hastened to rejoin her. Together they felt more in harmonywith one another than either of them felt with herself when alone. Afeeling stronger than friendship sprang up between them; an exclusivefeeling of life being possible only in each other's presence.Sometimes they were silent for hours; sometimes after they were alreadyin bed they would begin talking and go on till morning. They spoke mostof what was long past. Princess Mary spoke of her childhood, of hermother, her father, and her daydreams; and Natasha, who with a passivelack of understanding had formerly turned away from that life ofdevotion, submission, and the poetry of Christian self-sacrifice, nowfeeling herself bound to Princess Mary by affection, learned to love herpast too and to understand a side of life previously incomprehensible toher. She did not think of applying submission and self-abnegation to herown life, for she was accustomed to seek other joys, but she understoodand loved in another those previously incomprehensible virtues. ForPrincess Mary, listening to Natasha's tales of childhood and earlyyouth, there also opened out a new and hitherto uncomprehended side oflife: belief in life and its enjoyment.Just as before, they never mentioned him so as not to lower (as theythought) their exalted feelings by words; but this silence about him hadthe effect of making them gradually begin to forget him without beingconscious of it.Natasha had grown thin and pale and physically so weak that they alltalked about her health, and this pleased her. But sometimes she wassuddenly overcome by fear not only of death but of sickness, weakness,and loss of good looks, and involuntarily she examined her bare armcarefully, surprised at its thinness, and in the morning noticed herdrawn and, as it seemed to her, piteous face in her glass. It seemed toher that things must be so, and yet it was dreadfully sad.One day she went quickly upstairs and found herself out of breath.Unconsciously she immediately invented a reason for going down, andthen, testing her strength, ran upstairs again, observing the result.Another time when she called Dunyasha her voice trembled, so she calledagain--though she could hear Dunyasha coming--called her in the deepchest tones in which she had been wont to sing, and listened attentivelyto herself.She did not know and would not have believed it, but beneath the layerof slime that covered her soul and seemed to her impenetrable, delicateyoung shoots of grass were already sprouting, which taking root would socover with their living verdure the grief that weighed her down that itwould soon no longer be seen or noticed. The wound had begun to healfrom within.At the end of January Princess Mary left for Moscow, and the countinsisted on Natasha's going with her to consult the doctors.CHAPTER IVAfter the encounter at Vyazma, where Kutuzov had been unable to holdback his troops in their anxiety to overwhelm and cut off the enemy andso on, the farther movement of the fleeing French, and of the Russianswho pursued them, continued as far as Krasnoe without a battle. Theflight was so rapid that the Russian army pursuing the French could notkeep up with them; cavalry and artillery horses broke down, and theinformation received of the movements of the French was never reliable.The men in the Russian army were so worn out by this continuous marchingat the rate of twenty-seven miles a day that they could not go anyfaster.To realize the degree of exhaustion of the Russian army it is onlynecessary to grasp clearly the meaning of the fact that, while notlosing more than five thousand killed and wounded after Tarutino andless than a hundred prisoners, the Russian army which left that place ahundred thousand strong reached Krasnoe with only fifty thousand.The rapidity of the Russian pursuit was just as destructive to our armyas the flight of the French was to theirs. The only difference was thatthe Russian army moved voluntarily, with no such threat of destructionas hung over the French, and that the sick Frenchmen were left behind inenemy hands while the sick Russians left behind were among their ownpeople. The chief cause of the wastage of Napoleon's army was therapidity of its movement, and a convincing proof of this is thecorresponding decrease of the Russian army.Kutuzov as far as was in his power, instead of trying to check themovement of the French as was desired in Petersburg and by the Russianarmy generals, directed his whole activity here, as he had done atTarutino and Vyazma, to hastening it on while easing the movement of ourarmy.But besides this, since the exhaustion and enormous diminution of thearmy caused by the rapidity of the advance had become evident, anotherreason for slackening the pace and delaying presented itself to Kutuzov.The aim of the Russian army was to pursue the French. The road theFrench would take was unknown, and so the closer our troops trod ontheir heels the greater distance they had to cover. Only by following atsome distance could one cut across the zigzag path of the French. Allthe artful maneuvers suggested by our generals meant fresh movements ofthe army and a lengthening of its marches, whereas the only reasonableaim was to shorten those marches. To that end Kutuzov's activity wasdirected during the whole campaign from Moscow to Vilna--not casually orintermittently but so consistently that he never once deviated from it.Kutuzov felt and knew--not by reasoning or science but with the whole ofhis Russian being--what every Russian soldier felt: that the French werebeaten, that the enemy was flying and must be driven out; but at thesame time he like the soldiers realized all the hardship of this march,the rapidity of which was unparalleled for such a time of the year.But to the generals, especially the foreign ones in the Russian army,who wished to distinguish themselves, to astonish somebody, and for somereason to capture a king or a duke--it seemed that now--when any battlemust be horrible and senseless--was the very time to fight and conquersomebody. Kutuzov merely shrugged his shoulders when one after anotherthey presented projects of maneuvers to be made with those soldiers--ill-shod, insufficiently clad, and half starved--who within a month andwithout fighting a battle had dwindled to half their number, and who atthe best if the flight continued would have to go a greater distancethan they had already traversed, before they reached the frontier.This longing to distinguish themselves, to maneuver, to overthrow, andto cut off showed itself particularly whenever the Russians stumbled onthe French army.So it was at Krasnoe, where they expected to find one of the threeFrench columns and stumbled instead on Napoleon himself with sixteenthousand men. Despite all Kutuzov's efforts to avoid that ruinousencounter and to preserve his troops, the massacre of the broken mob ofFrench soldiers by worn-out Russians continued at Krasnoe for threedays.Toll wrote a disposition: "The first column will march to so and so,"etc. And as usual nothing happened in accord with the disposition.Prince Eugene of Wurttemberg fired from a hill over the French crowdsthat were running past, and demanded reinforcements which did notarrive. The French, avoiding the Russians, dispersed and hid themselvesin the forest by night, making their way round as best they could, andcontinued their flight.Miloradovich, who said he did not want to know anything about thecommissariat affairs of his detachment, and could never be found when hewas wanted--that chevalier sans peur et sans reproche * as he styledhimself--who was fond of parleys with the French, sent envoys demandingtheir surrender, wasted time, and did not do what he was ordered to do.* Knight without fear and without reproach."I give you that column, lads," he said, riding up to the troops andpointing out the French to the cavalry.And the cavalry, with spurs and sabers urging on horses that couldscarcely move, trotted with much effort to the column presented to them--that is to say, to a crowd of Frenchmen stark with cold, frost-bitten,and starving--and the column that had been presented to them threw downits arms and surrendered as it had long been anxious to do.At Krasnoe they took twenty-six thousand prisoners, several hundredcannon, and a stick called a "marshal's staff," and disputed as to whohad distinguished himself and were pleased with their achievement--though they much regretted not having taken Napoleon, or at least amarshal or a hero of some sort, and reproached one another andespecially Kutuzov for having failed to do so.These men, carried away by their passions, were but blind tools of themost melancholy law of necessity, but considered themselves heroes andimagined that they were accomplishing a most noble and honorable deed.They blamed Kutuzov and said that from the very beginning of thecampaign he had prevented their vanquishing Napoleon, that he thought ofnothing but satisfying his passions and would not advance from the LinenFactories because he was comfortable there, that at Krasnoe he checkedthe advance because on learning that Napoleon was there he had quitelost his head, and that it was probable that he had an understandingwith Napoleon and had been bribed by him, and so on, and so on.Not only did his contemporaries, carried away by their passions, talk inthis way, but posterity and history have acclaimed Napoleon as grand,while Kutuzov is described by foreigners as a crafty, dissolute, weakold courtier, and by Russians as something indefinite--a sort of puppetuseful only because he had a Russian name.CHAPTER VIn 1812 and 1813 Kutuzov was openly accused of blundering. The Emperorwas dissatisfied with him. And in a history recently written by order ofthe Highest Authorities it is said that Kutuzov was a cunning courtliar, frightened of the name of Napoleon, and that by his blunders atKrasnoe and the Berezina he deprived the Russian army of the glory ofcomplete victory over the French. ** History of the year 1812. The character of Kutuzov and reflections onthe unsatisfactory results of the battles at Krasnoe, by Bogdanovich.Such is the fate not of great men (grands hommes) whom the Russian minddoes not acknowledge, but of those rare and always solitary individualswho, discerning the will of Providence, submit their personal will toit. The hatred and contempt of the crowd punish such men for discerningthe higher laws.For Russian historians, strange and terrible to say, Napoleon--that mostinsignificant tool of history who never anywhere, even in exile, showedhuman dignity--Napoleon is the object of adulation and enthusiasm; he isgrand. But Kutuzov--the man who from the beginning to the end of hisactivity in 1812, never once swerving by word or deed from Borodino toVilna, presented an example exceptional in history of self-sacrifice anda present consciousness of the future importance of what was happening--Kutuzov seems to them something indefinite and pitiful, and whenspeaking of him and of the year 1812 they always seem a little ashamed.And yet it is difficult to imagine an historical character whoseactivity was so unswervingly directed to a single aim; and it would bedifficult to imagine any aim more worthy or more consonant with the willof the whole people. Still more difficult would it be to find aninstance in history of the aim of an historical personage being socompletely accomplished as that to which all Kutuzov's efforts weredirected in 1812.Kutuzov never talked of "forty centuries looking down from thePyramids," of the sacrifices he offered for the fatherland, or of whathe intended to accomplish or had accomplished; in general he saidnothing about himself, adopted no pose, always appeared to be thesimplest and most ordinary of men, and said the simplest and mostordinary things. He wrote letters to his daughters and to Madame deStael, read novels, liked the society of pretty women, jested withgenerals, officers, and soldiers, and never contradicted those who triedto prove anything to him. When Count Rostopchin at the Yauza bridgegalloped up to Kutuzov with personal reproaches for having caused thedestruction of Moscow, and said: "How was it you promised not to abandonMoscow without a battle?" Kutuzov replied: "And I shall not abandonMoscow without a battle," though Moscow was then already abandoned. WhenArakcheev, coming to him from the Emperor, said that Ermolov ought to beappointed chief of the artillery, Kutuzov replied: "Yes, I was justsaying so myself," though a moment before he had said quite thecontrary. What did it matter to him--who then alone amid a senselesscrowd understood the whole tremendous significance of what washappening--what did it matter to him whether Rostopchin attributed thecalamities of Moscow to him or to himself? Still less could it matter tohim who was appointed chief of the artillery.Not merely in these cases but continually did that old man--who byexperience of life had reached the conviction that thoughts and thewords serving as their expression are not what move people--use quitemeaningless words that happened to enter his head.But that man, so heedless of his words, did not once during the wholetime of his activity utter one word inconsistent with the single aimtoward which he moved throughout the whole war. Obviously in spite ofhimself, in very diverse circumstances, he repeatedly expressed his realthoughts with the bitter conviction that he would not be understood.Beginning with the battle of Borodino, from which time his disagreementwith those about him began, he alone said that the battle of Borodinowas a victory, and repeated this both verbally and in his dispatches andreports up to the time of his death. He alone said that the loss ofMoscow is not the loss of Russia. In reply to Lauriston's proposal ofpeace, he said: There can be no peace, for such is the people's will. Healone during the retreat of the French said that all our maneuvers areuseless, everything is being accomplished of itself better than we coulddesire; that the enemy must be offered "a golden bridge"; that neitherthe Tarutino, the Vyazma, nor the Krasnoe battles were necessary; thatwe must keep some force to reach the frontier with, and that he wouldnot sacrifice a single Russian for ten Frenchmen.And this courtier, as he is described to us, who lies to Arakcheev toplease the Emperor, he alone--incurring thereby the Emperor'sdispleasure--said in Vilna that to carry the war beyond the frontier isuseless and harmful.Nor do words alone prove that only he understood the meaning of theevents. His actions--without the smallest deviation--were all directedto one and the same threefold end: (1) to brace all his strength forconflict with the French, (2) to defeat them, and (3) to drive them outof Russia, minimizing as far as possible the sufferings of our peopleand of our army.This procrastinator Kutuzov, whose motto was "Patience and Time," thisenemy of decisive action, gave battle at Borodino, investing thepreparations for it with unparalleled solemnity. This Kutuzov who beforethe battle of Austerlitz began said that it would be lost, he alone, incontradiction to everyone else, declared till his death that Borodinowas a victory, despite the assurance of generals that the battle waslost and despite the fact that for an army to have to retire afterwinning a battle was unprecedented. He alone during the whole retreatinsisted that battles, which were useless then, should not be fought,and that a new war should not be begun nor the frontiers of Russiacrossed.It is easy now to understand the significance of these events--if onlywe abstain from attributing to the activity of the mass aims thatexisted only in the heads of a dozen individuals--for the events andresults now lie before us.But how did that old man, alone, in opposition to the general opinion,so truly discern the importance of the people's view of the events thatin all his activity he was never once untrue to it?The source of that extraordinary power of penetrating the meaning of theevents then occuring lay in the national feeling which he possessed infull purity and strength.Only the recognition of the fact that he possessed this feeling causedthe people in so strange a manner, contrary to the Tsar's wish, toselect him--an old man in disfavor--to be their representative in thenational war. And only that feeling placed him on that highest humanpedestal from which he, the commander-in-chief, devoted all his powersnot to slaying and destroying men but to saving and showing pity onthem.That simple, modest, and therefore truly great, figure could not be castin the false mold of a European hero--the supposed ruler of men--thathistory has invented.To a lackey no man can be great, for a lackey has his own conception ofgreatness.CHAPTER VIThe fifth of November was the first day of what is called the battle ofKrasnoe. Toward evening--after much disputing and many mistakes made bygenerals who did not go to their proper places, and after adjutants hadbeen sent about with counterorders--when it had become plain that theenemy was everywhere in flight and that there could and would be nobattle, Kutuzov left Krasnoe and went to Dobroe whither his headquartershad that day been transferred.The day was clear and frosty. Kutuzov rode to Dobroe on his plump littlewhite horse, followed by an enormous suite of discontented generals whowhispered among themselves behind his back. All along the road groups ofFrench prisoners captured that day (there were seven thousand of them)were crowding to warm themselves at campfires. Near Dobroe an immensecrowd of tattered prisoners, buzzing with talk and wrapped and bandagedin anything they had been able to get hold of, were standing in the roadbeside a long row of unharnessed French guns. At the approach of thecommander-in-chief the buzz of talk ceased and all eyes were fixed onKutuzov who, wearing a white cap with a red band and a padded overcoatthat bulged on his round shoulders, moved slowly along the road on hiswhite horse. One of the generals was reporting to him where the guns andprisoners had been captured.Kutuzov seemed preoccupied and did not listen to what the general wassaying. He screwed up his eyes with a dissatisfied look as he gazedattentively and fixedly at these prisoners, who presented a speciallywretched appearance. Most of them were disfigured by frost-bitten nosesand cheeks, and nearly all had red, swollen and festering eyes.One group of the French stood close to the road, and two of them, one ofwhom had his face covered with sores, were tearing a piece of raw fleshwith their hands. There was something horrible and bestial in thefleeting glance they threw at the riders and in the malevolentexpression with which, after a glance at Kutuzov, the soldier with thesores immediately turned away and went on with what he was doing.Kutuzov looked long and intently at these two soldiers. He puckered hisface, screwed up his eyes, and pensively swayed his head. At anotherspot he noticed a Russian soldier laughingly patting a Frenchman on theshoulder, saying something to him in a friendly manner, and Kutuzov withthe same expression on his face again swayed his head."What were you saying?" he asked the general, who continuing his reportdirected the commander-in-chief's attention to some standards capturedfrom the French and standing in front of the Preobrazhensk regiment."Ah, the standards!" said Kutuzov, evidently detaching himself withdifficulty from the thoughts that preoccupied him.He looked about him absently. Thousands of eyes were looking at him fromall sides awaiting a word from him.He stopped in front of the Preobrazhensk regiment, sighed deeply, andclosed his eyes. One of his suite beckoned to the soldiers carrying thestandards to advance and surround the commander-in-chief with them.Kutuzov was silent for a few seconds and then, submitting with evidentreluctance to the duty imposed by his position, raised his head andbegan to speak. A throng of officers surrounded him. He lookedattentively around at the circle of officers, recognizing several ofthem."I thank you all!" he said, addressing the soldiers and then again theofficers. In the stillness around him his slowly uttered words weredistinctly heard. "I thank you all for your hard and faithful service.The victory is complete and Russia will not forget you! Honor to youforever."He paused and looked around."Lower its head, lower it!" he said to a soldier who had accidentallylowered the French eagle he was holding before the Preobrazhenskstandards. "Lower, lower, that's it. Hurrah lads!" he added, addressingthe men with a rapid movement of his chin."Hur-r-rah!" roared thousands of voices.While the soldiers were shouting Kutuzov leaned forward in his saddleand bowed his head, and his eye lit up with a mild and apparently ironicgleam."You see, brothers..." said he when the shouts had ceased... and all atonce his voice and the expression of his face changed. It was no longerthe commander-in-chief speaking but an ordinary old man who wanted totell his comrades something very important.There was a stir among the throng of officers and in the ranks of thesoldiers, who moved that they might hear better what he was going tosay."You see, brothers, I know it's hard for you, but it can't be helped!Bear up; it won't be for long now! We'll see our visitors off and thenwe'll rest. The Tsar won't forget your service. It is hard for you, butstill you are at home while they--you see what they have come to," saidhe, pointing to the prisoners. "Worse off than our poorest beggars.While they were strong we didn't spare ourselves, but now we may evenpity them. They are human beings too. Isn't it so, lads?"He looked around, and in the direct, respectful, wondering gaze fixedupon him he read sympathy with what he had said. His face grew brighterand brighter with an old man's mild smile, which drew the corners of hislips and eyes into a cluster of wrinkles. He ceased speaking and bowedhis head as if in perplexity."But after all who asked them here? Serves them right, the bloodybastards!" he cried, suddenly lifting his head.And flourishing his whip he rode off at a gallop for the first timeduring the whole campaign, and left the broken ranks of the soldierslaughing joyfully and shouting "Hurrah!"Kutuzov's words were hardly understood by the troops. No one could haverepeated the field marshal's address, begun solemnly and then changinginto an old man's simplehearted talk; but the hearty sincerity of thatspeech, the feeling of majestic triumph combined with pity for the foeand consciousness of the justice of our cause, exactly expressed by thatold man's good-natured expletives, was not merely understood but lay inthe soul of every soldier and found expression in their joyous and long-sustained shouts. Afterwards when one of the generals addressed Kutuzovasking whether he wished his caleche to be sent for, Kutuzov inanswering unexpectedly gave a sob, being evidently greatly moved.CHAPTER VIIWhen the troops reached their night's halting place on the eighth ofNovember, the last day of the Krasnoe battles, it was already growingdusk. All day it had been calm and frosty with occasional lightlyfalling snow and toward evening it began to clear. Through the fallingsnow a purple-black and starry sky showed itself and the frost grewkeener.An infantry regiment which had left Tarutino three thousand strong butnow numbered only nine hundred was one of the first to arrive that nightat its halting place--a village on the highroad. The quartermasters whomet the regiment announced that all the huts were full of sick and deadFrenchmen, cavalrymen, and members of the staff. There was only one hutavailable for the regimental commander.The commander rode up to his hut. The regiment passed through thevillage and stacked its arms in front of the last huts.Like some huge many-limbed animal, the regiment began to prepare itslair and its food. One part of it dispersed and waded knee-deep throughthe snow into a birch forest to the right of the village, andimmediately the sound of axes and swords, the crashing of branches, andmerry voices could be heard from there. Another section amid theregimental wagons and horses which were standing in a group was busygetting out caldrons and rye biscuit, and feeding the horses. A thirdsection scattered through the village arranging quarters for the staffofficers, carrying out the French corpses that were in the huts, anddragging away boards, dry wood, and thatch from the roofs, for thecampfires, or wattle fences to serve for shelter.Some fifteen men with merry shouts were shaking down the high wattlewall of a shed, the roof of which had already been removed."Now then, all together--shove!" cried the voices, and the huge surfaceof the wall, sprinkled with snow and creaking with frost, was seenswaying in the gloom of the night. The lower stakes cracked more andmore and at last the wall fell, and with it the men who had been pushingit. Loud, coarse laughter and joyous shouts ensued."Now then, catch hold in twos! Hand up the lever! That's it... Where areyou shoving to?""Now, all together! But wait a moment, boys... With a song!"All stood silent, and a soft, pleasant velvety voice began to sing. Atthe end of the third verse as the last note died away, twenty voicesroared out at once: "Oo-oo-oo-oo! That's it. All together! Heave away,boys!..." but despite their united efforts the wattle hardly moved, andin the silence that followed the heavy breathing of the men was audible."Here, you of the Sixth Company! Devils that you are! Lend a hand...will you? You may want us one of these days."Some twenty men of the Sixth Company who were on their way into thevillage joined the haulers, and the wattle wall, which was about thirty-five feet long and seven feet high, moved forward along the villagestreet, swaying, pressing upon and cutting the shoulders of the gaspingmen."Get along... Falling? What are you stopping for? There now..."Merry senseless words of abuse flowed freely."What are you up to?" suddenly came the authoritative voice of asergeant major who came upon the men who were hauling their burden."There are gentry here; the general himself is in that hut, and youfoul-mouthed devils, you brutes, I'll give it to you!" shouted he,hitting the first man who came in his way a swinging blow on the back."Can't you make less noise?"The men became silent. The soldier who had been struck groaned and wipedhis face, which had been scratched till it bled by his falling againstthe wattle."There, how that devil hits out! He's made my face all bloody," said hein a frightened whisper when the sergeant major had passed on."Don't you like it?" said a laughing voice, and moderating their tonesthe men moved forward.When they were out of the village they began talking again as loud asbefore, interlarding their talk with the same aimless expletives.In the hut which the men had passed, the chief officers had gathered andwere in animated talk over their tea about the events of the day and themaneuvers suggested for tomorrow. It was proposed to make a flank marchto the left, cut off the Vice-King (Murat) and capture him.By the time the soldiers had dragged the wattle fence to its place thecampfires were blazing on all sides ready for cooking, the woodcrackled, the snow was melting, and black shadows of soldiers flitted toand fro all over the occupied space where the snow had been troddendown.Axes and choppers were plied all around. Everything was done without anyorders being given. Stores of wood were brought for the night, shelterswere rigged up for the officers, caldrons were being boiled, and musketsand accouterments put in order.The wattle wall the men had brought was set up in a semicircle by theEighth Company as a shelter from the north, propped up by musket rests,and a campfire was built before it. They beat the tattoo, called theroll, had supper, and settled down round the fires for the night--somerepairing their footgear, some smoking pipes, and some strippingthemselves naked to steam the lice out of their shirts.CHAPTER VIIIOne would have thought that under the almost incredibly wretchedconditions the Russian soldiers were in at that time--lacking warm bootsand sheepskin coats, without a roof over their heads, in the snow witheighteen degrees of frost, and without even full rations (thecommissariat did not always keep up with the troops)--they would havepresented a very sad and depressing spectacle.On the contrary, the army had never under the best material conditionspresented a more cheerful and animated aspect. This was because all whobegan to grow depressed or who lost strength were sifted out of the armyday by day. All the physically or morally weak had long since been leftbehind and only the flower of the army--physically and mentally--remained.More men collected behind the wattle fence of the Eighth Company thananywhere else. Two sergeants major were sitting with them and theircampfire blazed brighter than others. For leave to sit by their wattlethey demanded contributions of fuel."Eh, Makeev! What has become of you, you son of a bitch? Are you lost orhave the wolves eaten you? Fetch some more wood!" shouted a red-hairedand red-faced man, screwing up his eyes and blinking because of thesmoke but not moving back from the fire. "And you, Jackdaw, go and fetchsome wood!" said he to another soldier.This red-haired man was neither a sergeant nor a corporal, but beingrobust he ordered about those weaker than himself. The soldier theycalled "Jackdaw," a thin little fellow with a sharp nose, roseobediently and was about to go but at that instant there came into thelight of the fire the slender, handsome figure of a young soldiercarrying a load of wood."Bring it here--that's fine!"They split up the wood, pressed it down on the fire, blew at it withtheir mouths, and fanned it with the skirts of their greatcoats, makingthe flames hiss and crackle. The men drew nearer and lit their pipes.The handsome young soldier who had brought the wood, setting his armsakimbo, began stamping his cold feet rapidly and deftly on the spotwhere he stood."Mother! The dew is cold but clear.... It's well that I'm amusketeer..." he sang, pretending to hiccough after each syllable."Look out, your soles will fly off!" shouted the red-haired man,noticing that the sole of the dancer's boot was hanging loose. "What afellow you are for dancing!"The dancer stopped, pulled off the loose piece of leather, and threw iton the fire."Right enough, friend," said he, and, having sat down, took out of hisknapsack a scrap of blue French cloth, and wrapped it round his foot."It's the steam that spoils them," he added, stretching out his feettoward the fire."They'll soon be issuing us new ones. They say that when we've finishedhammering them, we're to receive double kits!""And that son of a bitch Petrov has lagged behind after all, it seems,"said one sergeant major."I've had an eye on him this long while," said the other."Well, he's a poor sort of soldier...""But in the Third Company they say nine men were missing yesterday.""Yes, it's all very well, but when a man's feet are frozen how can hewalk?""Eh? Don't talk nonsense!" said a sergeant major."Do you want to be doing the same?" said an old soldier, turningreproachfully to the man who had spoken of frozen feet."Well, you know," said the sharp-nosed man they called Jackdaw in asqueaky and unsteady voice, raising himself at the other side of thefire, "a plump man gets thin, but for a thin one it's death. Take me,now! I've got no strength left," he added, with sudden resolutionturning to the sergeant major. "Tell them to send me to hospital; I'maching all over; anyway I shan't be able to keep up.""That'll do, that'll do!" replied the sergeant major quietly.The soldier said no more and the talk went on."What a lot of those Frenchies were taken today, and the fact is thatnot one of them had what you might call real boots on," said a soldier,starting a new theme. "They were no more than make-believes.""The Cossacks have taken their boots. They were clearing the hut for thecolonel and carried them out. It was pitiful to see them, boys," put inthe dancer. "As they turned them over one seemed still alive and, wouldyou believe it, he jabbered something in their lingo.""But they're a clean folk, lads," the first man went on; "he was white--as white as birchbark--and some of them are such fine fellows, you mightthink they were nobles.""Well, what do you think? They make soldiers of all classes there.""But they don't understand our talk at all," said the dancer with apuzzled smile. "I asked him whose subject he was, and he jabbered in hisown way. A queer lot!""But it's strange, friends," continued the man who had wondered at theirwhiteness, "the peasants at Mozhaysk were saying that when they beganburying the dead--where the battle was you know--well, those dead hadbeen lying there for nearly a month, and says the peasant, 'they lie aswhite as paper, clean, and not as much smell as a puff of powdersmoke.'""Was it from the cold?" asked someone."You're a clever fellow! From the cold indeed! Why, it was hot. If ithad been from the cold, ours would not have rotted either. 'But,' hesays, 'go up to ours and they are all rotten and maggoty. So,' he says,'we tie our faces up with kerchiefs and turn our heads away as we dragthem off: we can hardly do it. But theirs,' he says, 'are white as paperand not so much smell as a whiff of gunpowder.'"All were silent."It must be from their food," said the sergeant major. "They used togobble the same food as the gentry."No one contradicted him."That peasant near Mozhaysk where the battle was said the men were allcalled up from ten villages around and they carted for twenty days andstill didn't finish carting the dead away. And as for the wolves, hesays...""That was a real battle," said an old soldier. "It's the only one worthremembering; but since that... it's only been tormenting folk.""And do you know, Daddy, the day before yesterday we ran at them and, myword, they didn't let us get near before they just threw down theirmuskets and went on their knees. 'Pardon!' they say. That's only onecase. They say Platov took 'Poleon himself twice. But he didn't know theright charm. He catches him and catches him--no good! He turns into abird in his hands and flies away. And there's no way of killing himeither.""You're a first-class liar, Kiselev, when I come to look at you!""Liar, indeed! It's the real truth.""If he fell into my hands, when I'd caught him I'd bury him in theground with an aspen stake to fix him down. What a lot of men he'sruined!""Well, anyhow we're going to end it. He won't come here again," remarkedthe old soldier, yawning.The conversation flagged, and the soldiers began settling down to sleep."Look at the stars. It's wonderful how they shine! You would think thewomen had spread out their linen," said one of the men, gazing withadmiration at the Milky Way."That's a sign of a good harvest next year.""We shall want some more wood.""You warm your back and your belly gets frozen. That's queer.""O Lord!""What are you pushing for? Is the fire only for you? Look how he'ssprawling!"In the silence that ensued, the snoring of those who had fallen asleepcould be heard. Others turned over and warmed themselves, now and againexchanging a few words. From a campfire a hundred paces off came a soundof general, merry laughter."Hark at them roaring there in the Fifth Company!" said one of thesoldiers, "and what a lot of them there are!"One of the men got up and went over to the Fifth Company."They're having such fun," said he, coming back. "Two Frenchies haveturned up. One's quite frozen and the other's an awful swaggerer. He'ssinging songs....""Oh, I'll go across and have a look...."And several of the men went over to the Fifth Company.CHAPTER IXThe fifth company was bivouacking at the very edge of the forest. A hugecampfire was blazing brightly in the midst of the snow, lighting up thebranches of trees heavy with hoarfrost.About midnight they heard the sound of steps in the snow of the forest,and the crackling of dry branches."A bear, lads," said one of the men.They all raised their heads to listen, and out of the forest into thebright firelight stepped two strangely clad human figures clinging toone another.These were two Frenchmen who had been hiding in the forest. They came upto the fire, hoarsely uttering something in a language our soldiers didnot understand. One was taller than the other; he wore an officer's hatand seemed quite exhausted. On approaching the fire he had been going tosit down, but fell. The other, a short sturdy soldier with a shawl tiedround his head, was stronger. He raised his companion and saidsomething, pointing to his mouth. The soldiers surrounded the Frenchmen,spread a greatcoat on the ground for the sick man, and brought somebuckwheat porridge and vodka for both of them.The exhausted French officer was Ramballe and the man with his headwrapped in the shawl was Morel, his orderly.When Morel had drunk some vodka and finished his bowl of porridge hesuddenly became unnaturally merry and chattered incessantly to thesoldiers, who could not understand him. Ramballe refused food andresting his head on his elbow lay silent beside the campfire, looking atthe Russian soldiers with red and vacant eyes. Occasionally he emitted along-drawn groan and then again became silent. Morel, pointing to hisshoulders, tried to impress on the soldiers the fact that Ramballe wasan officer and ought to be warmed. A Russian officer who had come up tothe fire sent to ask his colonel whether he would not take a Frenchofficer into his hut to warm him, and when the messenger returned andsaid that the colonel wished the officer to be brought to him, Ramballewas told to go. He rose and tried to walk, but staggered and would havefallen had not a soldier standing by held him up."You won't do it again, eh?" said one of the soldiers, winking andturning mockingly to Ramballe."Oh, you fool! Why talk rubbish, lout that you are--a real peasant!"came rebukes from all sides addressed to the jesting soldier.They surrounded Ramballe, lifted him on the crossed arms of twosoldiers, and carried him to the hut. Ramballe put his arms around theirnecks while they carried him and began wailing plaintively:"Oh, you fine fellows, my kind, kind friends! These are men! Oh, mybrave, kind friends," and he leaned his head against the shoulder of oneof the men like a child.Meanwhile Morel was sitting in the best place by the fire, surrounded bythe soldiers.Morel, a short sturdy Frenchman with inflamed and streaming eyes, waswearing a woman's cloak and had a shawl tied woman fashion round hishead over his cap. He was evidently tipsy, and was singing a French songin a hoarse broken voice, with an arm thrown round the nearest soldier.The soldiers simply held their sides as they watched him."Now then, now then, teach us how it goes! I'll soon pick it up. How isit?" said the man--a singer and a wag--whom Morel was embracing."Vive Henri Quatre! Vive ce roi valiant!" sang Morel, winking. "Cediable a quatre..." ** "Long live Henry the Fourth, that valiant king! That rowdy devil.""Vivarika! Vif-seruvaru! Sedyablyaka!" repeated the soldier, flourishinghis arm and really catching the tune."Bravo! Ha, ha, ha!" rose their rough, joyous laughter from all sides.Morel, wrinkling up his face, laughed too."Well, go on, go on!""Qui eut le triple talent, De boire, de battre, Et d'etre un vertgalant." ** Who had a triple talent For drinking, for fighting, And for being agallant old boy..."It goes smoothly, too. Well, now, Zaletaev!""Ke..." Zaletaev, brought out with effort: "ke-e-e-e," he drawled,laboriously pursing his lips, "le-trip-ta-la-de-bu-de-ba, e de-tra-va-ga-la" he sang."Fine! Just like the Frenchie! Oh, ho ho! Do you want some more to eat?""Give him some porridge: it takes a long time to get filled up afterstarving."They gave him some more porridge and Morel with a laugh set to work onhis third bowl. All the young soldiers smiled gaily as they watched him.The older men, who thought it undignified to amuse themselves with suchnonsense, continued to lie at the opposite side of the fire, but onewould occasionally raise himself on an elbow and glance at Morel with asmile."They are men too," said one of them as he wrapped himself up in hiscoat. "Even wormwood grows on its own root.""O Lord, O Lord! How starry it is! Tremendous! That means a hardfrost...."They all grew silent. The stars, as if knowing that no one was lookingat them, began to disport themselves in the dark sky: now flaring up,now vanishing, now trembling, they were busy whispering somethinggladsome and mysterious to one another.CHAPTER XThe French army melted away at the uniform rate of a mathematicalprogression; and that crossing of the Berezina about which so much hasbeen written was only one intermediate stage in its destruction, and notat all the decisive episode of the campaign. If so much has been andstill is written about the Berezina, on the French side this is onlybecause at the broken bridge across that river the calamities their armyhad been previously enduring were suddenly concentrated at one momentinto a tragic spectacle that remained in every memory, and on theRussian side merely because in Petersburg--far from the seat of war--aplan (again one of Pfuel's) had been devised to catch Napoleon in astrategic trap at the Berezina River. Everyone assured himself that allwould happen according to plan, and therefore insisted that it was justthe crossing of the Berezina that destroyed the French army. In realitythe results of the crossing were much less disastrous to the French--inguns and men lost--than Krasnoe had been, as the figures show.The sole importance of the crossing of the Berezina lies in the factthat it plainly and indubitably proved the fallacy of all the plans forcutting off the enemy's retreat and the soundness of the only possibleline of action--the one Kutuzov and the general mass of the armydemanded--namely, simply to follow the enemy up. The French crowd fledat a continually increasing speed and all its energy was directed toreaching its goal. It fled like a wounded animal and it was impossibleto block its path. This was shown not so much by the arrangements itmade for crossing as by what took place at the bridges. When the bridgesbroke down, unarmed soldiers, people from Moscow and women with childrenwho were with the French transport, all--carried on by vis inertiae--pressed forward into boats and into the ice-covered water and did not,surrender.That impulse was reasonable. The condition of fugitives and of pursuerswas equally bad. As long as they remained with their own people eachmight hope for help from his fellows and the definite place he heldamong them. But those who surrendered, while remaining in the samepitiful plight, would be on a lower level to claim a share in thenecessities of life. The French did not need to be informed of the factthat half the prisoners--with whom the Russians did not know what to do--perished of cold and hunger despite their captors' desire to save them;they felt that it could not be otherwise. The most compassionate Russiancommanders, those favorable to the French--and even the Frenchmen in theRussian service--could do nothing for the prisoners. The French perishedfrom the conditions to which the Russian army was itself exposed. It wasimpossible to take bread and clothes from our hungry and indispensablesoldiers to give to the French who, though not harmful, or hated, orguilty, were simply unnecessary. Some Russians even did that, but theywere exceptions.Certain destruction lay behind the French but in front there was hope.Their ships had been burned, there was no salvation save in collectiveflight, and on that the whole strength of the French was concentrated.The farther they fled the more wretched became the plight of theremnant, especially after the Berezina, on which (in consequence of thePetersburg plan) special hopes had been placed by the Russians, and thekeener grew the passions of the Russian commanders, who blamed oneanother and Kutuzov most of all. Anticipation that the failure of thePetersburg Berezina plan would be attributed to Kutuzov led todissatisfaction, contempt, and ridicule, more and more stronglyexpressed. The ridicule and contempt were of course expressed in arespectful form, making it impossible for him to ask wherein he was toblame. They did not talk seriously to him; when reporting to him orasking for his sanction they appeared to be fulfilling a regrettableformality, but they winked behind his back and tried to mislead him atevery turn.Because they could not understand him all these people assumed that itwas useless to talk to the old man; that he would never grasp theprofundity of their plans, that he would answer with his phrases (whichthey thought were mere phrases) about a "golden bridge," about theimpossibility of crossing the frontier with a crowd of tatterdemalions,and so forth. They had heard all that before. And all he said--that itwas necessary to await provisions, or that the men had no boots--was sosimple, while what they proposed was so complicated and clever, that itwas evident that he was old and stupid and that they, though not inpower, were commanders of genius.After the junction with the army of the brilliant admiral and Petersburghero Wittgenstein, this mood and the gossip of the staff reached theirmaximum. Kutuzov saw this and merely sighed and shrugged his shoulders.Only once, after the affair of the Berezina, did he get angry and writeto Bennigsen (who reported separately to the Emperor) the followingletter:"On account of your spells of ill health, will your excellency please beso good as to set off for Kaluga on receipt of this, and there awaitfurther commands and appointments from His Imperial Majesty."But after Bennigsen's departure, the Grand Duke Tsarevich ConstantinePavlovich joined the army. He had taken part in the beginning of thecampaign but had subsequently been removed from the army by Kutuzov. Nowhaving come to the army, he informed Kutuzov of the Emperor'sdispleasure at the poor success of our forces and the slowness of theiradvance. The Emperor intended to join the army personally in a few days'time.The old man, experienced in court as well as in military affairs--thissame Kutuzov who in August had been chosen commander-in-chief againstthe sovereign's wishes and who had removed the Grand Duke and heir--apparent from the army--who on his own authority and contrary to theEmperor's will had decided on the abandonment of Moscow, now realized atonce that his day was over, that his part was played, and that the powerhe was supposed to hold was no longer his. And he understood this notmerely from the attitude of the court. He saw on the one hand that themilitary business in which he had played his part was ended and feltthat his mission was accomplished; and at the same time he began to beconscious of the physical weariness of his aged body and of thenecessity of physical rest.On the twenty-ninth of November Kutuzov entered Vilna--his "dear Vilna"as he called it. Twice during his career Kutuzov had been governor ofVilna. In that wealthy town, which had not been injured, he found oldfriends and associations, besides the comforts of life of which he hadso long been deprived. And he suddenly turned from the cares of army andstate and, as far as the passions that seethed around him allowed,immersed himself in the quiet life to which he had formerly beenaccustomed, as if all that was taking place and all that had still to bedone in the realm of history did not concern him at all.Chichagov, one of the most zealous "cutters-off" and "breakers-up," whohad first wanted to effect a diversion in Greece and then in Warsaw butnever wished to go where he was sent: Chichagov, noted for the boldnesswith which he spoke to the Emperor, and who considered Kutuzov to beunder an obligation to him because when he was sent to make peace withTurkey in 1811 independently of Kutuzov, and found that peace hadalready been concluded, he admitted to the Emperor that the merit ofsecuring that peace was really Kutuzov's; this Chichagov was the firstto meet Kutuzov at the castle where the latter was to stay. In undressnaval uniform, with a dirk, and holding his cap under his arm, he handedKutuzov a garrison report and the keys of the town. The contemptuouslyrespectful attitude of the younger men to the old man in his dotage wasexpressed in the highest degree by the behavior of Chichagov, who knewof the accusations that were being directed against Kutuzov.When speaking to Chichagov, Kutuzov incidentally mentioned that thevehicles packed with china that had been captured from him at Borisovhad been recovered and would be restored to him."You mean to imply that I have nothing to eat out of.... On thecontrary, I can supply you with everything even if you want to givedinner parties," warmly replied Chichagov, who tried by every word hespoke to prove his own rectitude and therefore imagined Kutuzov to beanimated by the same desire.Kutuzov, shrugging his shoulders, replied with his subtle penetratingsmile: "I meant merely to say what I said."Contrary to the Emperor's wish Kutuzov detained the greater part of thearmy at Vilna. Those about him said that he became extraordinarily slackand physically feeble during his stay in that town. He attended to armyaffairs reluctantly, left everything to his generals, and while awaitingthe Emperor's arrival led a dissipated life.Having left Petersburg on the seventh of December with his suite--CountTolstoy, Prince Volkonski, Arakcheev, and others--the Emperor reachedVilna on the eleventh, and in his traveling sleigh drove straight to thecastle. In spite of the severe frost some hundred generals and staffofficers in full parade uniform stood in front of the castle, as well asa guard of honor of the Semenov regiment.A courier who galloped to the castle in advance, in a troyka with threefoam-flecked horses, shouted "Coming!" and Konovnitsyn rushed into thevestibule to inform Kutuzov, who was waiting in the hall porter's littlelodge.A minute later the old man's large stout figure in full-dress uniform,his chest covered with orders and a scarf drawn round his stomach,waddled out into the porch. He put on his hat with its peaks to thesides and, holding his gloves in his hand and walking with an effortsideways down the steps to the level of the street, took in his hand thereport he had prepared for the Emperor.There was running to and fro and whispering; another troyka flewfuriously up, and then all eyes were turned on an approaching sleigh inwhich the figures of the Emperor and Volkonski could already bedescried.From the habit of fifty years all this had a physically agitating effecton the old general. He carefully and hastily felt himself all over,readjusted his hat, and pulling himself together drew himself up and, atthe very moment when the Emperor, having alighted from the sleigh,lifted his eyes to him, handed him the report and began speaking in hissmooth, ingratiating voice.The Emperor with a rapid glance scanned Kutuzov from head to foot,frowned for an instant, but immediately mastering himself went up to theold man, extended his arms and embraced him. And this embrace too, owingto a long-standing impression related to his innermost feelings, had itsusual effect on Kutuzov and he gave a sob.The Emperor greeted the officers and the Semenov guard, and againpressing the old man's hand went with him into the castle.When alone with the field marshal the Emperor expressed hisdissatisfaction at the slowness of the pursuit and at the mistakes madeat Krasnoe and the Berezina, and informed him of his intentions for afuture campaign abroad. Kutuzov made no rejoinder or remark. The samesubmissive, expressionless look with which he had listened to theEmperor's commands on the field of Austerlitz seven years before settledon his face now.When Kutuzov came out of the study and with lowered head was crossingthe ballroom with his heavy waddling gait, he was arrested by someone'svoice saying:"Your Serene Highness!"Kutuzov raised his head and looked for a long while into the eyes ofCount Tolstoy, who stood before him holding a silver salver on which laya small object. Kutuzov seemed not to understand what was expected ofhim.Suddenly he seemed to remember; a scarcely perceptible smile flashedacross his puffy face, and bowing low and respectfully he took theobject that lay on the salver. It was the Order of St. George of theFirst Class.CHAPTER XINext day the field marshal gave a dinner and ball which the Emperorhonored by his presence. Kutuzov had received the Order of St. George ofthe First Class and the Emperor showed him the highest honors, buteveryone knew of the imperial dissatisfaction with him. The proprietieswere observed and the Emperor was the first to set that example, buteverybody understood that the old man was blameworthy and good-for-nothing. When Kutuzov, conforming to a custom of Catherine's day,ordered the standards that had been captured to be lowered at theEmperor's feet on his entering the ballroom, the Emperor made a wry faceand muttered something in which some people caught the words, "the oldcomedian."The Emperor's displeasure with Kutuzov was specially increased at Vilnaby the fact that Kutuzov evidently could not or would not understand theimportance of the coming campaign.When on the following morning the Emperor said to the officers assembledabout him: "You have not only saved Russia, you have saved Europe!" theyall understood that the war was not ended.Kutuzov alone would not see this and openly expressed his opinion thatno fresh war could improve the position or add to the glory of Russia,but could only spoil and lower the glorious position that Russia hadgained. He tried to prove to the Emperor the impossibility of levyingfresh troops, spoke of the hardships already endured by the people, ofthe possibility of failure and so forth.This being the field marshal's frame of mind he was naturally regardedas merely a hindrance and obstacle to the impending war.To avoid unpleasant encounters with the old man, the natural method wasto do what had been done with him at Austerlitz and with Barclay at thebeginning of the Russian campaign--to transfer the authority to theEmperor himself, thus cutting the ground from under the commander inchief's feet without upsetting the old man by informing him of thechange.With this object his staff was gradually reconstructed and its realstrength removed and transferred to the Emperor. Toll, Konovnitsyn, andErmolov received fresh appointments. Everyone spoke loudly of the fieldmarshal's great weakness and failing health.His health had to be bad for his place to be taken away and given toanother. And in fact his health was poor.So naturally, simply, and gradually--just as he had come from Turkey tothe Treasury in Petersburg to recruit the militia, and then to the armywhen he was needed there--now when his part was played out, Kutuzov'splace was taken by a new and necessary performer.The war of 1812, besides its national significance dear to every Russianheart, was now to assume another, a European, significance.The movement of peoples from west to east was to be succeeded by amovement of peoples from east to west, and for this fresh war anotherleader was necessary, having qualities and views differing fromKutuzov's and animated by different motives.Alexander I was as necessary for the movement of the peoples from eastto west and for the refixing of national frontiers as Kutuzov had beenfor the salvation and glory of Russia.Kutuzov did not understand what Europe, the balance of power, orNapoleon meant. He could not understand it. For the representative ofthe Russian people, after the enemy had been destroyed and Russia hadbeen liberated and raised to the summit of her glory, there was nothingleft to do as a Russian. Nothing remained for the representative of thenational war but to die, and Kutuzov died.CHAPTER XIIAs generally happens, Pierre did not feel the full effects of thephysical privation and strain he had suffered as prisoner until afterthey were over. After his liberation he reached Orel, and on the thirdday there, when preparing to go to Kiev, he fell ill and was laid up forthree months. He had what the doctors termed "bilious fever." Butdespite the fact that the doctors treated him, bled him, and gave himmedicines to drink, he recovered.Scarcely any impression was left on Pierre's mind by all that happenedto him from the time of his rescue till his illness. He remembered onlythe dull gray weather now rainy and now snowy, internal physicaldistress, and pains in his feet and side. He remembered a generalimpression of the misfortunes and sufferings of people and of beingworried by the curiosity of officers and generals who questioned him, healso remembered his difficulty in procuring a conveyance and horses, andabove all he remembered his incapacity to think and feel all that time.On the day of his rescue he had seen the body of Petya Rostov. That sameday he had learned that Prince Andrew, after surviving the battle ofBorodino for more than a month had recently died in the Rostovs' houseat Yaroslavl, and Denisov who told him this news also mentioned Helene'sdeath, supposing that Pierre had heard of it long before. All this atthe time seemed merely strange to Pierre: he felt he could not grasp itssignificance. Just then he was only anxious to get away as quickly aspossible from places where people were killing one another, to somepeaceful refuge where he could recover himself, rest, and think over allthe strange new facts he had learned; but on reaching Orel heimmediately fell ill. When he came to himself after his illness he sawin attendance on him two of his servants, Terenty and Vaska, who hadcome from Moscow; and also his cousin the eldest princess, who had beenliving on his estate at Elets and hearing of his rescue and illness hadcome to look after him.It was only gradually during his convalescence that Pierre lost theimpressions he had become accustomed to during the last few months andgot used to the idea that no one would oblige him to go anywheretomorrow, that no one would deprive him of his warm bed, and that hewould be sure to get his dinner, tea, and supper. But for a long time inhis dreams he still saw himself in the conditions of captivity. In thesame way little by little he came to understand the news he had beentold after his rescue, about the death of Prince Andrew, the death ofhis wife, and the destruction of the French.A joyous feeling of freedom--that complete inalienable freedom naturalto man which he had first experienced at the first halt outside Moscow--filled Pierre's soul during his convalescence. He was surprised to findthat this inner freedom, which was independent of external conditions,now had as it were an additional setting of external liberty. He wasalone in a strange town, without acquaintances. No one demanded anythingof him or sent him anywhere. He had all he wanted: the thought of hiswife which had been a continual torment to him was no longer there,since she was no more."Oh, how good! How splendid!" said he to himself when a cleanly laidtable was moved up to him with savory beef tea, or when he lay down forthe night on a soft clean bed, or when he remembered that the French hadgone and that his wife was no more. "Oh, how good, how splendid!"And by old habit he asked himself the question: "Well, and what then?What am I going to do?" And he immediately gave himself the answer:"Well, I shall live. Ah, how splendid!"The very question that had formerly tormented him, the thing he hadcontinually sought to find--the aim of life--no longer existed for himnow. That search for the aim of life had not merely disappearedtemporarily--he felt that it no longer existed for him and could notpresent itself again. And this very absence of an aim gave him thecomplete, joyous sense of freedom which constituted his happiness atthis time.He could not see an aim, for he now had faith--not faith in any kind ofrule, or words, or ideas, but faith in an ever-living, ever-manifestGod. Formerly he had sought Him in aims he set himself. That search foran aim had been simply a search for God, and suddenly in his captivityhe had learned not by words or reasoning but by direct feeling what hisnurse had told him long ago: that God is here and everywhere. In hiscaptivity he had learned that in Karataev God was greater, more infiniteand unfathomable than in the Architect of the Universe recognized by theFreemasons. He felt like a man who after straining his eyes to see intothe far distance finds what he sought at his very feet. All his life hehad looked over the heads of the men around him, when he should havemerely looked in front of him without straining his eyes.In the past he had never been able to find that great inscrutableinfinite something. He had only felt that it must exist somewhere andhad looked for it. In everything near and comprehensible he had onlywhat was limited, petty, commonplace, and senseless. He had equippedhimself with a mental telescope and looked into remote space, wherepetty worldliness hiding itself in misty distance had seemed to himgreat and infinite merely because it was not clearly seen. And such hadEuropean life, politics, Freemasonry, philosophy, and philanthropyseemed to him. But even then, at moments of weakness as he had accountedthem, his mind had penetrated to those distances and he had there seenthe same pettiness, worldliness, and senselessness. Now, however, he hadlearned to see the great, eternal, and infinite in everything, andtherefore--to see it and enjoy its contemplation--he naturally threwaway the telescope through which he had till now gazed over men's heads,and gladly regarded the ever-changing, eternally great, unfathomable,and infinite life around him. And the closer he looked the more tranquiland happy he became. That dreadful question, "What for?" which hadformerly destroyed all his mental edifices, no longer existed for him.To that question, "What for?" a simple answer was now always ready inhis soul: "Because there is a God, that God without whose will not onehair falls from a man's head."CHAPTER XIIIIn external ways Pierre had hardly changed at all. In appearance he wasjust what he used to be. As before he was absent-minded and seemedoccupied not with what was before his eyes but with something special ofhis own. The difference between his former and present self was thatformerly when he did not grasp what lay before him or was said to him,he had puckered his forehead painfully as if vainly seeking todistinguish something at a distance. At present he still forgot what wassaid to him and still did not see what was before his eyes, but he nowlooked with a scarcely perceptible and seemingly ironic smile at whatwas before him and listened to what was said, though evidently seeingand hearing something quite different. Formerly he had appeared to be akindhearted but unhappy man, and so people had been inclined to avoidhim. Now a smile at the joy of life always played round his lips, andsympathy for others, shone in his eyes with a questioning look as towhether they were as contented as he was, and people felt pleased by hispresence.Previously he had talked a great deal, grew excited when he talked, andseldom listened; now he was seldom carried away in conversation and knewhow to listen so that people readily told him their most intimatesecrets.The princess, who had never liked Pierre and had been particularlyhostile to him since she had felt herself under obligations to him afterthe old count's death, now after staying a short time in Orel--where shehad come intending to show Pierre that in spite of his ingratitude sheconsidered it her duty to nurse him--felt to her surprise and vexationthat she had become fond of him. Pierre did not in any way seek herapproval, he merely studied her with interest. Formerly she had feltthat he regarded her with indifference and irony, and so had shrunk intoherself as she did with others and had shown him only the combative sideof her nature; but now he seemed to be trying to understand the mostintimate places of her heart, and, mistrustfully at first but afterwardsgratefully, she let him see the hidden, kindly sides of her character.The most cunning man could not have crept into her confidence moresuccessfully, evoking memories of the best times of her youth andshowing sympathy with them. Yet Pierre's cunning consisted simply infinding pleasure in drawing out the human qualities of the embittered,hard, and (in her own way) proud princess."Yes, he is a very, very kind man when he is not under the influence ofbad people but of people such as myself," thought she.His servants too--Terenty and Vaska--in their own way noticed the changethat had taken place in Pierre. They considered that he had become much"simpler." Terenty, when he had helped him undress and wished him goodnight, often lingered with his master's boots in his hands and clothesover his arm, to see whether he would not start a talk. And Pierre,noticing that Terenty wanted a chat, generally kept him there."Well, tell me... now, how did you get food?" he would ask.And Terenty would begin talking of the destruction of Moscow, and of theold count, and would stand for a long time holding the clothes andtalking, or sometimes listening to Pierre's stories, and then would goout into the hall with a pleasant sense of intimacy with his master andaffection for him.The doctor who attended Pierre and visited him every day, though heconsidered it his duty as a doctor to pose as a man whose every momentwas of value to suffering humanity, would sit for hours with Pierretelling him his favorite anecdotes and his observations on thecharacters of his patients in general, and especially of the ladies."It's a pleasure to talk to a man like that; he is not like ourprovincials," he would say.There were several prisoners from the French army in Orel, and thedoctor brought one of them, a young Italian, to see Pierre.This officer began visiting Pierre, and the princess used to make fun ofthe tenderness the Italian expressed for him.The Italian seemed happy only when he could come to see Pierre, talkwith him, tell him about his past, his life at home, and his love, andpour out to him his indignation against the French and especiallyagainst Napoleon."If all Russians are in the least like you, it is sacrilege to fightsuch a nation," he said to Pierre. "You, who have suffered so from theFrench, do not even feel animosity toward them."Pierre had evoked the passionate affection of the Italian merely byevoking the best side of his nature and taking a pleasure in so doing.During the last days of Pierre's stay in Orel his old masonicacquaintance Count Willarski, who had introduced him to the lodge in1807, came to see him. Willarski was married to a Russian heiress whohad a large estate in Orel province, and he occupied a temporary post inthe commissariat department in that town.Hearing that Bezukhov was in Orel, Willarski, though they had never beenintimate, came to him with the professions of friendship and intimacythat people who meet in a desert generally express for one another.Willarski felt dull in Orel and was pleased to meet a man of his owncircle and, as he supposed, of similar interests.But to his surprise Willarski soon noticed that Pierre had lagged muchbehind the times, and had sunk, as he expressed it to himself, intoapathy and egotism."You are letting yourself go, my dear fellow," he said.But for all that Willarski found it pleasanter now than it had beenformerly to be with Pierre, and came to see him every day. To Pierre ashe looked at and listened to Willarski, it seemed strange to think thathe had been like that himself but a short time before.Willarski was a married man with a family, busy with his family affairs,his wife's affairs, and his official duties. He regarded all theseoccupations as hindrances to life, and considered that they were allcontemptible because their aim was the welfare of himself and hisfamily. Military, administrative, political, and masonic interestscontinually absorbed his attention. And Pierre, without trying to changethe other's views and without condemning him, but with the quiet,joyful, and amused smile now habitual to him, was interested in thisstrange though very familiar phenomenon.There was a new feature in Pierre's relations with Willarski, with theprincess, with the doctor, and with all the people he now met, whichgained for him the general good will. This was his acknowledgment of theimpossibility of changing a man's convictions by words, and hisrecognition of the possibility of everyone thinking, feeling, and seeingthings each from his own point of view. This legitimate peculiarity ofeach individual which used to excite and irritate Pierre now became abasis of the sympathy he felt for, and the interest he took in, otherpeople. The difference, and sometimes complete contradiction, betweenmen's opinions and their lives, and between one man and another, pleasedhim and drew from him an amused and gentle smile.In practical matters Pierre unexpectedly felt within himself a center ofgravity he had previously lacked. Formerly all pecuniary questions,especially requests for money to which, as an extremely wealthy man, hewas very exposed, produced in him a state of hopeless agitation andperplexity. "To give or not to give?" he had asked himself. "I have itand he needs it. But someone else needs it still more. Who needs itmost? And perhaps they are both impostors?" In the old days he had beenunable to find a way out of all these surmises and had given to all whoasked as long as he had anything to give. Formerly he had been in asimilar state of perplexity with regard to every question concerning hisproperty, when one person advised one thing and another something else.Now to his surprise he found that he no longer felt either doubt orperplexity about these questions. There was now within him a judge whoby some rule unknown to him decided what should or should not be done.He was as indifferent as heretofore to money matters, but now he feltcertain of what ought and what ought not to be done. The first time hehad recourse to his new judge was when a French prisoner, a colonel,came to him and, after talking a great deal about his exploits,concluded by making what amounted to a demand that Pierre should givehim four thousand francs to send to his wife and children. Pierrerefused without the least difficulty or effort, and was afterwardssurprised how simple and easy had been what used to appear soinsurmountably difficult. At the same time that he refused the colonel'sdemand he made up his mind that he must have recourse to artifice whenleaving Orel, to induce the Italian officer to accept some money ofwhich he was evidently in need. A further proof to Pierre of his ownmore settled outlook on practical matters was furnished by his decisionwith regard to his wife's debts and to the rebuilding of his houses inand near Moscow.His head steward came to him at Orel and Pierre reckoned up with him hisdiminished income. The burning of Moscow had cost him, according to thehead steward's calculation, about two million rubles.To console Pierre for these losses the head steward gave him an estimateshowing that despite these losses his income would not be diminished butwould even be increased if he refused to pay his wife's debts which hewas under no obligation to meet, and did not rebuild his Moscow houseand the country house on his Moscow estate, which had cost him eightythousand rubles a year and brought in nothing."Yes, of course that's true," said Pierre with a cheerful smile. "Idon't need all that at all. By being ruined I have become much richer."But in January Savelich came from Moscow and gave him an account of thestate of things there, and spoke of the estimate an architect had madeof the cost of rebuilding the town and country houses, speaking of thisas of a settled matter. About the same time he received letters fromPrince Vasili and other Petersburg acquaintances speaking of his wife'sdebts. And Pierre decided that the steward's proposals which had sopleased him were wrong and that he must go to Petersburg and settle hiswife's affairs and must rebuild in Moscow. Why this was necessary he didnot know, but he knew for certain that it was necessary. His incomewould be reduced by three fourths, but he felt it must be done.Willarski was going to Moscow and they agreed to travel together.During the whole time of his convalescence in Orel Pierre hadexperienced a feeling of joy, freedom, and life; but when during hisjourney he found himself in the open world and saw hundreds of newfaces, that feeling was intensified. Throughout his journey he felt likea schoolboy on holiday. Everyone--the stagecoach driver, the post-houseoverseers, the peasants on the roads and in the villages--had a newsignificance for him. The presence and remarks of Willarski whocontinually deplored the ignorance and poverty of Russia and itsbackwardness compared with Europe only heightened Pierre's pleasure.Where Willarski saw deadness Pierre saw an extraordinary strength andvitality--the strength which in that vast space amid the snowsmaintained the life of this original, peculiar, and unique people. Hedid not contradict Willarski and even seemed to agree with him--anapparent agreement being the simplest way to avoid discussions thatcould lead to nothing--and he smiled joyfully as he listened to him.CHAPTER XIVIt would be difficult to explain why and whither ants whose heap hasbeen destroyed are hurrying: some from the heap dragging bits ofrubbish, larvae, and corpses, others back to the heap, or why theyjostle, overtake one another, and fight, and it would be equallydifficult to explain what caused the Russians after the departure of theFrench to throng to the place that had formerly been Moscow. But when wewatch the ants round their ruined heap, the tenacity, energy, andimmense number of the delving insects prove that despite the destructionof the heap, something indestructible, which though intangible is thereal strength of the colony, still exists; and similarly, though inMoscow in the month of October there was no government and no churches,shrines, riches, or houses--it was still the Moscow it had been inAugust. All was destroyed, except something intangible yet powerful andindestructible.The motives of those who thronged from all sides to Moscow after it hadbeen cleared of the enemy were most diverse and personal, and at firstfor the most part savage and brutal. One motive only they all had incommon: a desire to get to the place that had been called Moscow, toapply their activities there.Within a week Moscow already had fifteen thousand inhabitants, in afortnight twenty-five thousand, and so on. By the autumn of 1813 thenumber, ever increasing and increasing, exceeded what it had been in1812.The first Russians to enter Moscow were the Cossacks of Wintzingerode'sdetachment, peasants from the adjacent villages, and residents who hadfled from Moscow and had been hiding in its vicinity. The Russians whoentered Moscow, finding it plundered, plundered it in their turn. Theycontinued what the French had begun. Trains of peasant carts came toMoscow to carry off to the villages what had been abandoned in theruined houses and the streets. The Cossacks carried off what they couldto their camps, and the householders seized all they could find in otherhouses and moved it to their own, pretending that it was their property.But the first plunderers were followed by a second and a thirdcontingent, and with increasing numbers plundering became more and moredifficult and assumed more definite forms.The French found Moscow abandoned but with all the organizations ofregular life, with diverse branches of commerce and craftsmanship, withluxury, and governmental and religious institutions. These forms werelifeless but still existed. There were bazaars, shops, warehouses,market stalls, granaries--for the most part still stocked with goods--and there were factories and workshops, palaces and wealthy housesfilled with luxuries, hospitals, prisons, government offices, churches,and cathedrals. The longer the French remained the more these forms oftown life perished, until finally all was merged into one confused,lifeless scene of plunder.The more the plundering by the French continued, the more both thewealth of Moscow and the strength of its plunderers was destroyed. Butplundering by the Russians, with which the reoccupation of the citybegan, had an opposite effect: the longer it continued and the greaterthe number of people taking part in it the more rapidly was the wealthof the city and its regular life restored.Besides the plunderers, very various people, some drawn by curiosity,some by official duties, some by self-interest--house owners, clergy,officials of all kinds, tradesmen, artisans, and peasants--streamed intoMoscow as blood flows to the heart.Within a week the peasants who came with empty carts to carry offplunder were stopped by the authorities and made to cart the corpses outof the town. Other peasants, having heard of their comrades'discomfiture, came to town bringing rye, oats, and hay, and beat downone another's prices to below what they had been in former days. Gangsof carpenters hoping for high pay arrived in Moscow every day, and onall sides logs were being hewn, new houses built, and old, charred onesrepaired. Tradesmen began trading in booths. Cookshops and taverns wereopened in partially burned houses. The clergy resumed the services inmany churches that had not been burned. Donors contributed Churchproperty that had been stolen. Government clerks set up their baize-covered tables and their pigeonholes of documents in small rooms. Thehigher authorities and the police organized the distribution of goodsleft behind by the French. The owners of houses in which much propertyhad been left, brought there from other houses, complained of theinjustice of taking everything to the Faceted Palace in the Kremlin;others insisted that as the French had gathered things from differenthouses into this or that house, it would be unfair to allow its owner tokeep all that was found there. They abused the police and bribed them,made out estimates at ten times their value for government stores thathad perished in the fire, and demanded relief. And Count Rostopchinwrote proclamations.CHAPTER XVAt the end of January Pierre went to Moscow and stayed in an annex ofhis house which had not been burned. He called on Count Rostopchin andon some acquaintances who were back in Moscow, and he intended to leavefor Petersburg two days later. Everybody was celebrating the victory,everything was bubbling with life in the ruined but reviving city.Everyone was pleased to see Pierre, everyone wished to meet him, andeveryone questioned him about what he had seen. Pierre felt particularlywell disposed toward them all, but was now instinctively on his guardfor fear of binding himself in any way. To all questions put to him--whether important or quite trifling--such as: Where would he live? Washe going to rebuild? When was he going to Petersburg and would he mindtaking a parcel for someone?--he replied: "Yes, perhaps," or, "I thinkso," and so on.He had heard that the Rostovs were at Kostroma but the thought ofNatasha seldom occurred to him. If it did it was only as a pleasantmemory of the distant past. He felt himself not only free from socialobligations but also from that feeling which, it seemed to him, he hadaroused in himself.On the third day after his arrival he heard from the Drubetskoys thatPrincess Mary was in Moscow. The death, sufferings, and last days ofPrince Andrew had often occupied Pierre's thoughts and now recurred tohim with fresh vividness. Having heard at dinner that Princess Mary wasin Moscow and living in her house--which had not been burned--inVozdvizhenka Street, he drove that same evening to see her.On his way to the house Pierre kept thinking of Prince Andrew, of theirfriendship, of his various meetings with him, and especially of the lastone at Borodino."Is it possible that he died in the bitter frame of mind he was then in?Is it possible that the meaning of life was not disclosed to him beforehe died?" thought Pierre. He recalled Karataev and his death andinvoluntarily began to compare these two men, so different, and yet sosimilar in that they had both lived and both died and in the love hefelt for both of them.Pierre drove up to the house of the old prince in a most serious mood.The house had escaped the fire; it showed signs of damage but itsgeneral aspect was unchanged. The old footman, who met Pierre with astern face as if wishing to make the visitor feel that the absence ofthe old prince had not disturbed the order of things in the house,informed him that the princess had gone to her own apartments, and thatshe received on Sundays."Announce me. Perhaps she will see me," said Pierre."Yes, sir," said the man. "Please step into the portrait gallery."A few minutes later the footman returned with Dessalles, who broughtword from the princess that she would be very glad to see Pierre if hewould excuse her want of ceremony and come upstairs to her apartment.In a rather low room lit by one candle sat the princess and with heranother person dressed in black. Pierre remembered that the princessalways had lady companions, but who they were and what they were like henever knew or remembered. "This must be one of her companions," hethought, glancing at the lady in the black dress.The princess rose quickly to meet him and held out her hand."Yes," she said, looking at his altered face after he had kissed herhand, "so this is how we meet again. He spoke of you even at the verylast," she went on, turning her eyes from Pierre to her companion with ashyness that surprised him for an instant."I was so glad to hear of your safety. It was the first piece of goodnews we had received for a long time."Again the princess glanced round at her companion with even moreuneasiness in her manner and was about to add something, but Pierreinterrupted her."Just imagine--I knew nothing about him!" said he. "I thought he hadbeen killed. All I know I heard at second hand from others. I only knowthat he fell in with the Rostovs.... What a strange coincidence!"Pierre spoke rapidly and with animation. He glanced once at thecompanion's face, saw her attentive and kindly gaze fixed on him, and,as often happens when one is talking, felt somehow that this companionin the black dress was a good, kind, excellent creature who would nothinder his conversing freely with Princess Mary.But when he mentioned the Rostovs, Princess Mary's face expressed stillgreater embarrassment. She again glanced rapidly from Pierre's face tothat of the lady in the black dress and said:"Do you really not recognize her?"Pierre looked again at the companion's pale, delicate face with itsblack eyes and peculiar mouth, and something near to him, long forgottenand more than sweet, looked at him from those attentive eyes."But no, it can't be!" he thought. "This stern, thin, pale face thatlooks so much older! It cannot be she. It merely reminds me of her." Butat that moment Princess Mary said, "Natasha!" And with difficulty,effort, and stress, like the opening of a door grown rusty on itshinges, a smile appeared on the face with the attentive eyes, and fromthat opening door came a breath of fragrance which suffused Pierre witha happiness he had long forgotten and of which he had not even beenthinking--especially at that moment. It suffused him, seized him, andenveloped him completely. When she smiled doubt was no longer possible,it was Natasha and he loved her.At that moment Pierre involuntarily betrayed to her, to Princess Mary,and above all to himself, a secret of which he himself had been unaware.He flushed joyfully yet with painful distress. He tried to hide hisagitation. But the more he tried to hide it the more clearly--clearerthan any words could have done--did he betray to himself, to her, and toPrincess Mary that he loved her."No, it's only the unexpectedness of it," thought Pierre. But as soon ashe tried to continue the conversation he had begun with Princess Mary heagain glanced at Natasha, and a still-deeper flush suffused his face anda still-stronger agitation of mingled joy and fear seized his soul. Hebecame confused in his speech and stopped in the middle of what he wassaying.Pierre had failed to notice Natasha because he did not at all expect tosee her there, but he had failed to recognize her because the change inher since he last saw her was immense. She had grown thin and pale, butthat was not what made her unrecognizable; she was unrecognizable at themoment he entered because on that face whose eyes had always shone witha suppressed smile of the joy of life, now when he first entered andglanced at her there was not the least shadow of a smile: only her eyeswere kindly attentive and sadly interrogative.Pierre's confusion was not reflected by any confusion on Natasha's part,but only by the pleasure that just perceptibly lit up her whole face.CHAPTER XVI"She has come to stay with me," said Princess Mary. "The count andcountess will be here in a few days. The countess is in a dreadfulstate; but it was necessary for Natasha herself to see a doctor. Theyinsisted on her coming with me.""Yes, is there a family free from sorrow now?" said Pierre, addressingNatasha. "You know it happened the very day we were rescued. I saw him.What a delightful boy he was!"Natasha looked at him, and by way of answer to his words her eyeswidened and lit up."What can one say or think of as a consolation?" said Pierre. "Nothing!Why had such a splendid boy, so full of life, to die?""Yes, in these days it would be hard to live without faith..." remarkedPrincess Mary."Yes, yes, that is really true," Pierre hastily interrupted her."Why is it true?" Natasha asked, looking attentively into Pierre's eyes."How can you ask why?" said Princess Mary. "The thought alone of whatawaits..."Natasha without waiting for Princess Mary to finish again lookedinquiringly at Pierre."And because," Pierre continued, "only one who believes that there is aGod ruling us can bear a loss such as hers and... yours."Natasha had already opened her mouth to speak but suddenly stopped.Pierre hurriedly turned away from her and again addressed Princess Mary,asking about his friend's last days.Pierre's confusion had now almost vanished, but at the same time he feltthat his freedom had also completely gone. He felt that there was now ajudge of his every word and action whose judgment mattered more to himthan that of all the rest of the world. As he spoke now he wasconsidering what impression his words would make on Natasha. He did notpurposely say things to please her, but whatever he was saying heregarded from her standpoint.Princess Mary--reluctantly as is usual in such cases--began telling ofthe condition in which she had found Prince Andrew. But Pierre's facequivering with emotion, his questions and his eager restless expression,gradually compelled her to go into details which she feared to recallfor her own sake."Yes, yes, and so...?" Pierre kept saying as he leaned toward her withhis whole body and eagerly listened to her story. "Yes, yes... so hegrew tranquil and softened? With all his soul he had always sought onething--to be perfectly good--so he could not be afraid of death. Thefaults he had--if he had any--were not of his making. So he didsoften?... What a happy thing that he saw you again," he added, suddenlyturning to Natasha and looking at her with eyes full of tears.Natasha's face twitched. She frowned and lowered her eyes for a moment.She hesitated for an instant whether to speak or not."Yes, that was happiness," she then said in her quiet voice with itsdeep chest notes. "For me it certainly was happiness." She paused. "Andhe... he... he said he was wishing for it at the very moment I enteredthe room...."Natasha's voice broke. She blushed, pressed her clasped hands on herknees, and then controlling herself with an evident effort lifted herhead and began to speak rapidly."We knew nothing of it when we started from Moscow. I did not dare toask about him. Then suddenly Sonya told me he was traveling with us. Ihad no idea and could not imagine what state he was in, all I wanted wasto see him and be with him," she said, trembling, and breathing quickly.And not letting them interrupt her she went on to tell what she hadnever yet mentioned to anyone--all she had lived through during thosethree weeks of their journey and life at Yaroslavl.Pierre listened to her with lips parted and eyes fixed upon her full oftears. As he listened he did not think of Prince Andrew, nor of death,nor of what she was telling. He listened to her and felt only pity forher, for what she was suffering now while she was speaking.Princess Mary, frowning in her effort to hold back her tears, sat besideNatasha, and heard for the first time the story of those last days ofher brother's and Natasha's love.Evidently Natasha needed to tell that painful yet joyful tale.She spoke, mingling most trifling details with the intimate secrets ofher soul, and it seemed as if she could never finish. Several times sherepeated the same thing twice.Dessalles' voice was heard outside the door asking whether littleNicholas might come in to say good night."Well, that's all--everything," said Natasha.She got up quickly just as Nicholas entered, almost ran to the doorwhich was hidden by curtains, struck her head against it, and rushedfrom the room with a moan either of pain or sorrow.Pierre gazed at the door through which she had disappeared and did notunderstand why he suddenly felt all alone in the world.Princess Mary roused him from his abstraction by drawing his attentionto her nephew who had entered the room.At that moment of emotional tenderness young Nicholas' face, whichresembled his father's, affected Pierre so much that when he had kissedthe boy he got up quickly, took out his handkerchief, and went to thewindow. He wished to take leave of Princess Mary, but she would not lethim go."No, Natasha and I sometimes don't go to sleep till after two, so pleasedon't go. I will order supper. Go downstairs, we will come immediately."Before Pierre left the room Princess Mary told him: "This is the firsttime she has talked of him like that."CHAPTER XVIIPierre was shown into the large, brightly lit dining room; a few minuteslater he heard footsteps and Princess Mary entered with Natasha. Natashawas calm, though a severe and grave expression had again settled on herface. They all three of them now experienced that feeling of awkwardnesswhich usually follows after a serious and heartfelt talk. It isimpossible to go back to the same conversation, to talk of trifles isawkward, and yet the desire to speak is there and silence seems likeaffectation. They went silently to table. The footmen drew back thechairs and pushed them up again. Pierre unfolded his cold table napkinand, resolving to break the silence, looked at Natasha and at PrincessMary. They had evidently both formed the same resolution; the eyes ofboth shone with satisfaction and a confession that besides sorrow lifealso has joy."Do you take vodka, Count?" asked Princess Mary, and those wordssuddenly banished the shadows of the past. "Now tell us about yourself,"said she. "One hears such improbable wonders about you.""Yes," replied Pierre with the smile of mild irony now habitual to him."They even tell me wonders I myself never dreamed of! Mary Abramovnainvited me to her house and kept telling me what had happened, or oughtto have happened, to me. Stepan Stepanych also instructed me how I oughtto tell of my experiences. In general I have noticed that it is veryeasy to be an interesting man (I am an interesting man now); peopleinvite me out and tell me all about myself."Natasha smiled and was on the point of speaking."We have been told," Princess Mary interrupted her, "that you lost twomillions in Moscow. Is that true?""But I am three times as rich as before," returned Pierre.Though the position was now altered by his decision to pay his wife'sdebts and to rebuild his houses, Pierre still maintained that he hadbecome three times as rich as before."What I have certainly gained is freedom," he began seriously, but didnot continue, noticing that this theme was too egotistic."And are you building?""Yes. Savelich says I must!""Tell me, you did not know of the countess' death when you decided toremain in Moscow?" asked Princess Mary and immediately blushed, noticingthat her question, following his mention of freedom, ascribed to hiswords a meaning he had perhaps not intended."No," answered Pierre, evidently not considering awkward the meaningPrincess Mary had given to his words. "I heard of it in Orel and youcannot imagine how it shocked me. We were not an exemplary couple," headded quickly, glancing at Natasha and noticing on her face curiosity asto how he would speak of his wife, "but her death shocked me terribly.When two people quarrel they are always both in fault, and one's ownguilt suddenly becomes terribly serious when the other is no longeralive. And then such a death... without friends and without consolation!I am very, very sorry for her," he concluded, and was pleased to noticea look of glad approval on Natasha's face."Yes, and so you are once more an eligible bachelor," said PrincessMary.Pierre suddenly flushed crimson and for a long time tried not to look atNatasha. When he ventured to glance her way again her face was cold,stern, and he fancied even contemptuous."And did you really see and speak to Napoleon, as we have been told?"said Princess Mary.Pierre laughed."No, not once! Everybody seems to imagine that being taken prisonermeans being Napoleon's guest. Not only did I never see him but I heardnothing about him--I was in much lower company!"Supper was over, and Pierre who at first declined to speak about hiscaptivity was gradually led on to do so."But it's true that you remained in Moscow to kill Napoleon?" Natashaasked with a slight smile. "I guessed it then when we met at theSukharev tower, do you remember?"Pierre admitted that it was true, and from that was gradually led byPrincess Mary's questions and especially by Natasha's into giving adetailed account of his adventures.At first he spoke with the amused and mild irony now customary with himtoward everybody and especially toward himself, but when he came todescribe the horrors and sufferings he had witnessed he wasunconsciously carried away and began speaking with the suppressedemotion of a man re-experiencing in recollection strong impressions hehas lived through.Princess Mary with a gentle smile looked now at Pierre and now atNatasha. In the whole narrative she saw only Pierre and his goodness.Natasha, leaning on her elbow, the expression of her face constantlychanging with the narrative, watched Pierre with an attention that neverwandered--evidently herself experiencing all that he described. Not onlyher look, but her exclamations and the brief questions she put, showedPierre that she understood just what he wished to convey. It was clearthat she understood not only what he said but also what he wished to,but could not, express in words. The account Pierre gave of the incidentwith the child and the woman for protecting whom he was arrested wasthis: "It was an awful sight--children abandoned, some in the flames...One was snatched out before my eyes... and there were women who hadtheir things snatched off and their earrings torn out..." he flushed andgrew confused. "Then a patrol arrived and all the men--all those whowere not looting, that is--were arrested, and I among them.""I am sure you're not telling us everything; I am sure you didsomething..." said Natasha and pausing added, "something fine?"Pierre continued. When he spoke of the execution he wanted to pass overthe horrible details, but Natasha insisted that he should not omitanything.Pierre began to tell about Karataev, but paused. By this time he hadrisen from the table and was pacing the room, Natasha following him withher eyes. Then he added:"No, you can't understand what I learned from that illiterate man--thatsimple fellow.""Yes, yes, go on!" said Natasha. "Where is he?""They killed him almost before my eyes."And Pierre, his voice trembling continually, went on to tell of the lastdays of their retreat, of Karataev's illness and his death.He told of his adventures as he had never yet recalled them. He now, asit were, saw a new meaning in all he had gone through. Now that he wastelling it all to Natasha he experienced that pleasure which a man haswhen women listen to him--not clever women who when listening either tryto remember what they hear to enrich their minds and when opportunityoffers to retell it, or who wish to adopt it to some thought of theirown and promptly contribute their own clever comments prepared in theirlittle mental workshop--but the pleasure given by real women gifted witha capacity to select and absorb the very best a man shows of himself.Natasha without knowing it was all attention: she did not lose a word,no single quiver in Pierre's voice, no look, no twitch of a muscle inhis face, nor a single gesture. She caught the unfinished word in itsflight and took it straight into her open heart, divining the secretmeaning of all Pierre's mental travail.Princess Mary understood his story and sympathized with him, but she nowsaw something else that absorbed all her attention. She saw thepossibility of love and happiness between Natasha and Pierre, and thefirst thought of this filled her heart with gladness.It was three o'clock in the morning. The footmen came in with sad andstern faces to change the candles, but no one noticed them.Pierre finished his story. Natasha continued to look at him intentlywith bright, attentive, and animated eyes, as if trying to understandsomething more which he had perhaps left untold. Pierre in shamefacedand happy confusion glanced occasionally at her, and tried to think whatto say next to introduce a fresh subject. Princess Mary was silent. Itoccurred to none of them that it was three o'clock and time to go tobed."People speak of misfortunes and sufferings," remarked Pierre, "but ifat this moment I were asked: 'Would you rather be what you were beforeyou were taken prisoner, or go through all this again?' then forheaven's sake let me again have captivity and horseflesh! We imaginethat when we are thrown out of our usual ruts all is lost, but it isonly then that what is new and good begins. While there is life there ishappiness. There is much, much before us. I say this to you," he added,turning to Natasha."Yes, yes," she said, answering something quite different. "I too shouldwish nothing but to relive it all from the beginning."Pierre looked intently at her."Yes, and nothing more," said Natasha."It's not true, not true!" cried Pierre. "I am not to blame for beingalive and wishing to live--nor you either."Suddenly Natasha bent her head, covered her face with her hands, andbegan to cry."What is it, Natasha?" said Princess Mary."Nothing, nothing." She smiled at Pierre through her tears. "Good night!It is time for bed."Pierre rose and took his leave.Princess Mary and Natasha met as usual in the bedroom. They talked ofwhat Pierre had told them. Princess Mary did not express her opinion ofPierre nor did Natasha speak of him."Well, good night, Mary!" said Natasha. "Do you know, I am often afraidthat by not speaking of him" (she meant Prince Andrew) "for fear of notdoing justice to our feelings, we forget him."Princess Mary sighed deeply and thereby acknowledged the justice ofNatasha's remark, but she did not express agreement in words."Is it possible to forget?" said she."It did me so much good to tell all about it today. It was hard andpainful, but good, very good!" said Natasha. "I am sure he really lovedhim. That is why I told him... Was it all right?" she added, suddenlyblushing."To tell Pierre? Oh, yes. What a splendid man he is!" said PrincessMary."Do you know, Mary..." Natasha suddenly said with a mischievous smilesuch as Princess Mary had not seen on her face for a long time, "he hassomehow grown so clean, smooth, and fresh--as if he had just come out ofa Russian bath; do you understand? Out of a moral bath. Isn't it true?""Yes," replied Princess Mary. "He has greatly improved.""With a short coat and his hair cropped; just as if, well, just as if hehad come straight from the bath... Papa used to...""I understand why he" (Prince Andrew) "liked no one so much as him,"said Princess Mary."Yes, and yet he is quite different. They say men are friends when theyare quite different. That must be true. Really he is quite unlike him--in everything.""Yes, but he's wonderful.""Well, good night," said Natasha.And the same mischievous smile lingered for a long time on her face asif it had been forgotten there.CHAPTER XVIIIIt was a long time before Pierre could fall asleep that night. He pacedup and down his room, now turning his thoughts on a difficult problemand frowning, now suddenly shrugging his shoulders and wincing, and nowsmiling happily.He was thinking of Prince Andrew, of Natasha, and of their love, at onemoment jealous of her past, then reproaching himself for that feeling.It was already six in the morning and he still paced up and down theroom."Well, what's to be done if it cannot be avoided? What's to be done?Evidently it has to be so," said he to himself, and hastily undressinghe got into bed, happy and agitated but free from hesitation orindecision."Strange and impossible as such happiness seems, I must do everythingthat she and I may be man and wife," he told himself.A few days previously Pierre had decided to go to Petersburg on theFriday. When he awoke on the Thursday, Savelich came to ask him aboutpacking for the journey."What, to Petersburg? What is Petersburg? Who is there in Petersburg?"he asked involuntarily, though only to himself. "Oh, yes, long agobefore this happened I did for some reason mean to go to Petersburg," hereflected. "Why? But perhaps I shall go. What a good fellow he is andhow attentive, and how he remembers everything," he thought, looking atSavelich's old face, "and what a pleasant smile he has!""Well, Savelich, do you still not wish to accept your freedom?" Pierreasked him."What's the good of freedom to me, your excellency? We lived under thelate count--the kingdom of heaven be his!--and we have lived under youtoo, without ever being wronged.""And your children?""The children will live just the same. With such masters one can live.""But what about my heirs?" said Pierre. "Supposing I suddenly marry...it might happen," he added with an involuntary smile."If I may take the liberty, your excellency, it would be a good thing.""How easy he thinks it," thought Pierre. "He doesn't know how terribleit is and how dangerous. Too soon or too late... it is terrible!""So what are your orders? Are you starting tomorrow?" asked Savelich."No, I'll put it off for a bit. I'll tell you later. You must forgivethe trouble I have put you to," said Pierre, and seeing Savelich smile,he thought: "But how strange it is that he should not know that nowthere is no Petersburg for me, and that that must be settled first ofall! But probably he knows it well enough and is only pretending. ShallI have a talk with him and see what he thinks?" Pierre reflected. "No,another time."At breakfast Pierre told the princess, his cousin, that he had been tosee Princess Mary the day before and had there met--"Whom do you think?Natasha Rostova!"The princess seemed to see nothing more extraordinary in that than if hehad seen Anna Semenovna."Do you know her?" asked Pierre."I have seen the princess," she replied. "I heard that they werearranging a match for her with young Rostov. It would be a very goodthing for the Rostovs, they are said to be utterly ruined.""No; I mean do you know Natasha Rostova?""I heard about that affair of hers at the time. It was a great pity.""No, she either doesn't understand or is pretending," thought Pierre."Better not say anything to her either."The princess too had prepared provisions for Pierre's journey."How kind they all are," thought Pierre. "What is surprising is thatthey should trouble about these things now when it can no longer be ofinterest to them. And all for me!"On the same day the Chief of Police came to Pierre, inviting him to senda representative to the Faceted Palace to recover things that were to bereturned to their owners that day."And this man too," thought Pierre, looking into the face of the Chiefof Police. "What a fine, good-looking officer and how kind. Fancybothering about such trifles now! And they actually say he is not honestand takes bribes. What nonsense! Besides, why shouldn't he take bribes?That's the way he was brought up, and everybody does it. But what akind, pleasant face and how he smiles as he looks at me."Pierre went to Princess Mary's to dinner.As he drove through the streets past the houses that had been burneddown, he was surprised by the beauty of those ruins. The picturesquenessof the chimney stacks and tumble-down walls of the burned-out quartersof the town, stretching out and concealing one another, reminded him ofthe Rhine and the Colosseum. The cabmen he met and their passengers, thecarpenters cutting the timber for new houses with axes, the womenhawkers, and the shopkeepers, all looked at him with cheerful beamingeyes that seemed to say: "Ah, there he is! Let's see what will come ofit!"At the entrance to Princess Mary's house Pierre felt doubtful whether hehad really been there the night before and really seen Natasha andtalked to her. "Perhaps I imagined it; perhaps I shall go in and find noone there." But he had hardly entered the room before he felt herpresence with his whole being by the loss of his sense of freedom. Shewas in the same black dress with soft folds and her hair was done thesame way as the day before, yet she was quite different. Had she beenlike this when he entered the day before he could not for a moment havefailed to recognize her.She was as he had known her almost as a child and later on as PrinceAndrew's fiancee. A bright questioning light shone in her eyes, and onher face was a friendly and strangely roguish expression.Pierre dined with them and would have spent the whole evening there, butPrincess Mary was going to vespers and Pierre left the house with her.Next day he came early, dined, and stayed the whole evening. ThoughPrincess Mary and Natasha were evidently glad to see their visitor andthough all Pierre's interest was now centered in that house, by theevening they had talked over everything and the conversation passed fromone trivial topic to another and repeatedly broke off. He stayed so longthat Princess Mary and Natasha exchanged glances, evidently wonderingwhen he would go. Pierre noticed this but could not go. He felt uneasyand embarrassed, but sat on because he simply could not get up and takehis leave.Princess Mary, foreseeing no end to this, rose first, and complaining ofa headache began to say good night."So you are going to Petersburg tomorrow?" she asked."No, I am not going," Pierre replied hastily, in a surprised tone and asthough offended. "Yes... no... to Petersburg? Tomorrow--but I won't saygood-by yet. I will call round in case you have any commissions for me,"said he, standing before Princess Mary and turning red, but not takinghis departure.Natasha gave him her hand and went out. Princess Mary on the other handinstead of going away sank into an armchair, and looked sternly andintently at him with her deep, radiant eyes. The weariness she hadplainly shown before had now quite passed off. With a deep and long-drawn sigh she seemed to be prepared for a lengthy talk.When Natasha left the room Pierre's confusion and awkwardnessimmediately vanished and were replaced by eager excitement. He quicklymoved an armchair toward Princess Mary."Yes, I wanted to tell you," said he, answering her look as if she hadspoken. "Princess, help me! What am I to do? Can I hope? Princess, mydear friend, listen! I know it all. I know I am not worthy of her, Iknow it's impossible to speak of it now. But I want to be a brother toher. No, not that, I don't, I can't..."He paused and rubbed his face and eyes with his hands."Well," he went on with an evident effort at self-control and coherence."I don't know when I began to love her, but I have loved her and heralone all my life, and I love her so that I cannot imagine life withouther. I cannot propose to her at present, but the thought that perhapsshe might someday be my wife and that I may be missing thatpossibility... that possibility... is terrible. Tell me, can I hope?Tell me what I am to do, dear princess!" he added after a pause, andtouched her hand as she did not reply."I am thinking of what you have told me," answered Princess Mary. "Thisis what I will say. You are right that to speak to her of love atpresent..."Princess Mary stopped. She was going to say that to speak of love wasimpossible, but she stopped because she had seen by the sudden change inNatasha two days before that she would not only not be hurt if Pierrespoke of his love, but that it was the very thing she wished for."To speak to her now wouldn't do," said the princess all the same."But what am I to do?""Leave it to me," said Princess Mary. "I know..."Pierre was looking into Princess Mary's eyes."Well?... Well?..." he said."I know that she loves... will love you," Princess Mary correctedherself.Before her words were out, Pierre had sprung up and with a frightenedexpression seized Princess Mary's hand."What makes you think so? You think I may hope? You think...?""Yes, I think so," said Princess Mary with a smile. "Write to herparents, and leave it to me. I will tell her when I can. I wish it tohappen and my heart tells me it will.""No, it cannot be! How happy I am! But it can't be.... How happy I am!No, it can't be!" Pierre kept saying as he kissed Princess Mary's hands."Go to Petersburg, that will be best. And I will write to you," shesaid."To Petersburg? Go there? Very well, I'll go. But I may come againtomorrow?"Next day Pierre came to say good-by. Natasha was less animated than shehad been the day before; but that day as he looked at her Pierresometimes felt as if he was vanishing and that neither he nor sheexisted any longer, that nothing existed but happiness. "Is it possible?No, it can't be," he told himself at every look, gesture, and word thatfilled his soul with joy.When on saying good-by he took her thin, slender hand, he could not helpholding it a little longer in his own."Is it possible that this hand, that face, those eyes, all this treasureof feminine charm so strange to me now, is it possible that it will oneday be mine forever, as familiar to me as I am to myself?... No, that'simpossible!...""Good-bye, Count," she said aloud. "I shall look forward very much toyour return," she added in a whisper.And these simple words, her look, and the expression on her face whichaccompanied them, formed for two months the subject of inexhaustiblememories, interpretations, and happy meditations for Pierre. "'I shalllook forward very much to your return....' Yes, yes, how did she say it?Yes, 'I shall look forward very much to your return.' Oh, how happy Iam! What is happening to me? How happy I am!" said Pierre to himself.CHAPTER XIXThere was nothing in Pierre's soul now at all like what had troubled itduring his courtship of Helene.He did not repeat to himself with a sickening feeling of shame the wordshe had spoken, or say: "Oh, why did I not say that?" and, "Whatever mademe say 'Je vous aime'?" On the contrary, he now repeated in imaginationevery word that he or Natasha had spoken and pictured every detail ofher face and smile, and did not wish to diminish or add anything, butonly to repeat it again and again. There was now not a shadow of doubtin his mind as to whether what he had undertaken was right or wrong.Only one terrible doubt sometimes crossed his mind: "Wasn't it all adream? Isn't Princess Mary mistaken? Am I not too conceited and self-confident? I believe all this--and suddenly Princess Mary will tell her,and she will be sure to smile and say: 'How strange! He must be deludinghimself. Doesn't he know that he is a man, just a man, while I...? I amsomething altogether different and higher.'"That was the only doubt often troubling Pierre. He did not now make anyplans. The happiness before him appeared so inconceivable that if onlyhe could attain it, it would be the end of all things. Everything endedwith that.A joyful, unexpected frenzy, of which he had thought himself incapable,possessed him. The whole meaning of life--not for him alone but for thewhole world--seemed to him centered in his love and the possibility ofbeing loved by her. At times everybody seemed to him to be occupied withone thing only--his future happiness. Sometimes it seemed to him thatother people were all as pleased as he was himself and merely tried tohide that pleasure by pretending to be busy with other interests. Inevery word and gesture he saw allusions to his happiness. He oftensurprised those he met by his significantly happy looks and smiles whichseemed to express a secret understanding between him and them. And whenhe realized that people might not be aware of his happiness, he pitiedthem with his whole heart and felt a desire somehow to explain to themthat all that occupied them was a mere frivolous trifle unworthy ofattention.When it was suggested to him that he should enter the civil service, orwhen the war or any general political affairs were discussed on theassumption that everybody's welfare depended on this or that issue ofevents, he would listen with a mild and pitying smile and surprisepeople by his strange comments. But at this time he saw everybody--boththose who, as he imagined, understood the real meaning of life (that is,what he was feeling) and those unfortunates who evidently did notunderstand it--in the bright light of the emotion that shone withinhimself, and at once without any effort saw in everyone he meteverything that was good and worthy of being loved.When dealing with the affairs and papers of his dead wife, her memoryaroused in him no feeling but pity that she had not known the bliss henow knew. Prince Vasili, who having obtained a new post and some freshdecorations was particularly proud at this time, seemed to him apathetic, kindly old man much to be pitied.Often in afterlife Pierre recalled this period of blissful insanity. Allthe views he formed of men and circumstances at this time remained truefor him always. He not only did not renounce them subsequently, but whenhe was in doubt or inwardly at variance, he referred to the views he hadheld at this time of his madness and they always proved correct."I may have appeared strange and queer then," he thought, "but I was notso mad as I seemed. On the contrary I was then wiser and had moreinsight than at any other time, and understood all that is worthunderstanding in life, because... because I was happy."Pierre's insanity consisted in not waiting, as he used to do, todiscover personal attributes which he termed "good qualities" in peoplebefore loving them; his heart was now overflowing with love, and byloving people without cause he discovered indubitable causes for lovingthem.CHAPTER XXAfter Pierre's departure that first evening, when Natasha had said toPrincess Mary with a gaily mocking smile: "He looks just, yes, just asif he had come out of a Russian bath--in a short coat and with his haircropped," something hidden and unknown to herself, but irrepressible,awoke in Natasha's soul.Everything: her face, walk, look, and voice, was suddenly altered. Toher own surprise a power of life and hope of happiness rose to thesurface and demanded satisfaction. From that evening she seemed to haveforgotten all that had happened to her. She no longer complained of herposition, did not say a word about the past, and no longer feared tomake happy plans for the future. She spoke little of Pierre, but whenPrincess Mary mentioned him a long-extinguished light once more kindledin her eyes and her lips curved with a strange smile.The change that took place in Natasha at first surprised Princess Mary;but when she understood its meaning it grieved her. "Can she have lovedmy brother so little as to be able to forget him so soon?" she thoughtwhen she reflected on the change. But when she was with Natasha she wasnot vexed with her and did not reproach her. The reawakened power oflife that had seized Natasha was so evidently irrepressible andunexpected by her that in her presence Princess Mary felt that she hadno right to reproach her even in her heart.Natasha gave herself up so fully and frankly to this new feeling thatshe did not try to hide the fact that she was no longer sad, but brightand cheerful.When Princess Mary returned to her room after her nocturnal talk withPierre, Natasha met her on the threshold."He has spoken? Yes? He has spoken?" she repeated.And a joyful yet pathetic expression which seemed to beg forgiveness forher joy settled on Natasha's face."I wanted to listen at the door, but I knew you would tell me."Understandable and touching as the look with which Natasha gazed at herseemed to Princess Mary, and sorry as she was to see her agitation,these words pained her for a moment. She remembered her brother and hislove."But what's to be done? She can't help it," thought the princess.And with a sad and rather stern look she told Natasha all that Pierrehad said. On hearing that he was going to Petersburg Natasha wasastounded."To Petersburg!" she repeated as if unable to understand.But noticing the grieved expression on Princess Mary's face she guessedthe reason of that sadness and suddenly began to cry."Mary," said she, "tell me what I should do! I am afraid of being bad.Whatever you tell me, I will do. Tell me....""You love him?""Yes," whispered Natasha."Then why are you crying? I am happy for your sake," said Princess Mary,who because of those tears quite forgave Natasha's joy."It won't be just yet--someday. Think what fun it will be when I am hiswife and you marry Nicholas!""Natasha, I have asked you not to speak of that. Let us talk about you."They were silent awhile."But why go to Petersburg?" Natasha suddenly asked, and hastily repliedto her own question. "But no, no, he must... Yes, Mary, He must...."FIRST EPILOGUE: 1813 - 20CHAPTER ISeven years had passed. The storm-tossed sea of European history hadsubsided within its shores and seemed to have become calm. But themysterious forces that move humanity (mysterious because the laws oftheir motion are unknown to us) continued to operate.Though the surface of the sea of history seemed motionless, the movementof humanity went on as unceasingly as the flow of time. Various groupsof people formed and dissolved, the coming formation and dissolution ofkingdoms and displacement of peoples was in course of preparation.The sea of history was not driven spasmodically from shore to shore aspreviously. It was seething in its depths. Historic figures were notborne by the waves from one shore to another as before. They now seemedto rotate on one spot. The historical figures at the head of armies, whoformerly reflected the movement of the masses by ordering wars,campaigns, and battles, now reflected the restless movement by politicaland diplomatic combinations, laws, and treaties.The historians call this activity of the historical figures "thereaction."In dealing with this period they sternly condemn the historicalpersonages who, in their opinion, caused what they describe as thereaction. All the well-known people of that period, from Alexander andNapoleon to Madame de Stael, Photius, Schelling, Fichte, Chateaubriand,and the rest, pass before their stern judgment seat and are acquitted orcondemned according to whether they conduced to progress or to reaction.According to their accounts a reaction took place at that time in Russiaalso, and the chief culprit was Alexander I, the same man who accordingto them was the chief cause of the liberal movement at the commencementof his reign, being the savior of Russia.There is no one in Russian literature now, from schoolboy essayist tolearned historian, who does not throw his little stone at Alexander forthings he did wrong at this period of his reign."He ought to have acted in this way and in that way. In this case he didwell and in that case badly. He behaved admirably at the beginning ofhis reign and during 1812, but acted badly by giving a constitution toPoland, forming the Holy Alliance, entrusting power to Arakcheev,favoring Golitsyn and mysticism, and afterwards Shishkov and Photius. Healso acted badly by concerning himself with the active army anddisbanding the Semenov regiment."It would take a dozen pages to enumerate all the reproaches thehistorians address to him, based on their knowledge of what is good forhumanity.What do these reproaches mean?Do not the very actions for which the historians praise Alexander I (theliberal attempts at the beginning of his reign, his struggle withNapoleon, the firmness he displayed in 1812 and the campaign of 1813)flow from the same sources--the circumstances of his birth, education,and life--that made his personality what it was and from which theactions for which they blame him (the Holy Alliance, the restoration ofPoland, and the reaction of 1820 and later) also flowed?In what does the substance of those reproaches lie?It lies in the fact that an historic character like Alexander I,standing on the highest possible pinnacle of human power with theblinding light of history focused upon him; a character exposed to thosestrongest of all influences: the intrigues, flattery, and self-deceptioninseparable from power; a character who at every moment of his life felta responsibility for all that was happening in Europe; and not afictitious but a live character who like every man had his personalhabits, passions, and impulses toward goodness, beauty, and truth--thatthis character--though not lacking in virtue (the historians do notaccuse him of that)--had not the same conception of the welfare ofhumanity fifty years ago as a present-day professor who from his youthupwards has been occupied with learning: that is, with books andlectures and with taking notes from them.But even if we assume that fifty years ago Alexander I was mistaken inhis view of what was good for the people, we must inevitably assume thatthe historian who judges Alexander will also after the lapse of sometime turn out to be mistaken in his view of what is good for humanity.This assumption is all the more natural and inevitable because, watchingthe movement of history, we see that every year and with each newwriter, opinion as to what is good for mankind changes; so that whatonce seemed good, ten years later seems bad, and vice versa. And what ismore, we find at one and the same time quite contradictory views as towhat is bad and what is good in history: some people regard giving aconstitution to Poland and forming the Holy Alliance as praiseworthy inAlexander, while others regard it as blameworthy.The activity of Alexander or of Napoleon cannot be called useful orharmful, for it is impossible to say for what it was useful or harmful.If that activity displeases somebody, this is only because it does notagree with his limited understanding of what is good. Whether thepreservation of my father's house in Moscow, or the glory of the Russianarms, or the prosperity of the Petersburg and other universities, or thefreedom of Poland or the greatness of Russia, or the balance of power inEurope, or a certain kind of European culture called "progress" appearto me to be good or bad, I must admit that besides these things theaction of every historic character has other more general purposesinaccessible to me.But let us assume that what is called science can harmonize allcontradictions and possesses an unchanging standard of good and bad bywhich to try historic characters and events; let us say that Alexandercould have done everything differently; let us say that with guidancefrom those who blame him and who profess to know the ultimate aim of themovement of humanity, he might have arranged matters according to theprogram his present accusers would have given him--of nationality,freedom, equality, and progress (these, I think, cover the ground). Letus assume that this program was possible and had then been formulated,and that Alexander had acted on it. What would then have become of theactivity of all those who opposed the tendency that then prevailed inthe government--an activity that in the opinion of the historians wasgood and beneficent? Their activity would not have existed: there wouldhave been no life, there would have been nothing.If we admit that human life can be ruled by reason, the possibility oflife is destroyed.CHAPTER IIIf we assume as the historians do that great men lead humanity to theattainment of certain ends--the greatness of Russia or of France, thebalance of power in Europe, the diffusion of the ideas of theRevolution, general progress, or anything else--then it is impossible toexplain the facts of history without introducing the conceptions ofchance and genius.If the aim of the European wars at the beginning of the nineteenthcentury had been the aggrandizement of Russia, that aim might have beenaccomplished without all the preceding wars and without the invasion. Ifthe aim was the aggrandizement of France, that might have been attainedwithout the Revolution and without the Empire. If the aim was thedissemination of ideas, the printing press could have accomplished thatmuch better than warfare. If the aim was the progress of civilization,it is easy to see that there are other ways of diffusing civilizationmore expedient than by the destruction of wealth and of human lives.Why did it happen in this and not in some other way?Because it happened so! "Chance created the situation; genius utilizedit," says history.But what is chance? What is genius?The words chance and genius do not denote any really existing thing andtherefore cannot be defined. Those words only denote a certain stage ofunderstanding of phenomena. I do not know why a certain event occurs; Ithink that I cannot know it; so I do not try to know it and I talk aboutchance. I see a force producing effects beyond the scope of ordinaryhuman agencies; I do not understand why this occurs and I talk ofgenius.To a herd of rams, the ram the herdsman drives each evening into aspecial enclosure to feed and that becomes twice as fat as the othersmust seem to be a genius. And it must appear an astonishing conjunctionof genius with a whole series of extraordinary chances that this ram,who instead of getting into the general fold every evening goes into aspecial enclosure where there are oats--that this very ram, swellingwith fat, is killed for meat.But the rams need only cease to suppose that all that happens to themhappens solely for the attainment of their sheepish aims; they need onlyadmit that what happens to them may also have purposes beyond their ken,and they will at once perceive a unity and coherence in what happened tothe ram that was fattened. Even if they do not know for what purposethey are fattened, they will at least know that all that happened to theram did not happen accidentally, and will no longer need the conceptionsof chance or genius.Only by renouncing our claim to discern a purpose immediatelyintelligible to us, and admitting the ultimate purpose to be beyond ourken, may we discern the sequence of experiences in the lives of historiccharacters and perceive the cause of the effect they produce(incommensurable with ordinary human capabilities), and then the wordschance and genius become superfluous.We need only confess that we do not know the purpose of the Europeanconvulsions and that we know only the facts--that is, the murders, firstin France, then in Italy, in Africa, in Prussia, in Austria, in Spain,and in Russia--and that the movements from the west to the east and fromthe east to the west form the essence and purpose of these events, andnot only shall we have no need to see exceptional ability and genius inNapoleon and Alexander, but we shall be unable to consider them to beanything but like other men, and we shall not be obliged to haverecourse to chance for an explanation of those small events which madethese people what they were, but it will be clear that all those smallevents were inevitable.By discarding a claim to knowledge of the ultimate purpose, we shallclearly perceive that just as one cannot imagine a blossom or seed forany single plant better suited to it than those it produces, so it isimpossible to imagine any two people more completely adapted down to thesmallest detail for the purpose they had to fulfill, than Napoleon andAlexander with all their antecedents.CHAPTER IIIThe fundamental and essential significance of the European events of thebeginning of the nineteenth century lies in the movement of the mass ofthe European peoples from west to east and afterwards from east to west.The commencement of that movement was the movement from west to east.For the peoples of the west to be able to make their warlike movement toMoscow it was necessary: (1) that they should form themselves into amilitary group of a size able to endure a collision with the warlikemilitary group of the east, (2) that they should abandon all establishedtraditions and customs, and (3) that during their military movement theyshould have at their head a man who could justify to himself and to themthe deceptions, robberies, and murders which would have to be committedduring that movement.And beginning with the French Revolution the old inadequately largegroup was destroyed, as well as the old habits and traditions, and stepby step a group was formed of larger dimensions with new customs andtraditions, and a man was produced who would stand at the head of thecoming movement and bear the responsibility for all that had to be done.A man without convictions, without habits, without traditions, without aname, and not even a Frenchman, emerges--by what seem the strangestchances--from among all the seething French parties, and without joiningany one of them is borne forward to a prominent position.The ignorance of his colleagues, the weakness and insignificance of hisopponents, the frankness of his falsehoods, and the dazzling and self-confident limitations of this man raise him to the head of the army. Thebrilliant qualities of the soldiers of the army sent to Italy, hisopponents' reluctance to fight, and his own childish audacity and self-confidence secure him military fame. Innumerable so-called chancesaccompany him everywhere. The disfavor into which he falls with therulers of France turns to his advantage. His attempts to avoid hispredestined path are unsuccessful: he is not received into the Russianservice, and the appointment he seeks in Turkey comes to nothing. Duringthe war in Italy he is several times on the verge of destruction andeach time is saved in an unexpected manner. Owing to various diplomaticconsiderations the Russian armies--just those which might have destroyedhis prestige--do not appear upon the scene till he is no longer there.On his return from Italy he finds the government in Paris in a processof dissolution in which all those who are in it are inevitably wiped outand destroyed. And by chance an escape from this dangerous positionpresents itself in the form of an aimless and senseless expedition toAfrica. Again so-called chance accompanies him. Impregnable Maltasurrenders without a shot; his most reckless schemes are crowned withsuccess. The enemy's fleet, which subsequently did not let a single boatpass, allows his entire army to elude it. In Africa a whole series ofoutrages are committed against the almost unarmed inhabitants. And themen who commit these crimes, especially their leader, assure themselvesthat this is admirable, this is glory--it resembles Caesar and Alexanderthe Great and is therefore good.This ideal of glory and grandeur--which consists not merely inconsidering nothing wrong that one does but in priding oneself on everycrime one commits, ascribing to it an incomprehensible supernaturalsignificance--that ideal, destined to guide this man and his associates,had scope for its development in Africa. Whatever he does succeeds. Theplague does not touch him. The cruelty of murdering prisoners is notimputed to him as a fault. His childishly rash, uncalled-for, andignoble departure from Africa, leaving his comrades in distress, is setdown to his credit, and again the enemy's fleet twice lets him slippast. When, intoxicated by the crimes he has committed so successfully,he reaches Paris, the dissolution of the republican government, which ayear earlier might have ruined him, has reached its extreme limit, andhis presence there now as a newcomer free from party entanglements canonly serve to exalt him--and though he himself has no plan, he is quiteready for his new role.He had no plan, he was afraid of everything, but the parties snatched athim and demanded his participation.He alone--with his ideal of glory and grandeur developed in Italy andEgypt, his insane self-adulation, his boldness in crime and frankness inlying--he alone could justify what had to be done.He is needed for the place that awaits him, and so almost apart from hiswill and despite his indecision, his lack of a plan, and all hismistakes, he is drawn into a conspiracy that aims at seizing power andthe conspiracy is crowned with success.He is pushed into a meeting of the legislature. In alarm he wishes toflee, considering himself lost. He pretends to fall into a swoon andsays senseless things that should have ruined him. But the once proudand shrewd rulers of France, feeling that their part is played out, areeven more bewildered than he, and do not say the words they should havesaid to destroy him and retain their power.Chance, millions of chances, give him power, and all men as if byagreement co-operate to confirm that power. Chance forms the charactersof the rulers of France, who submit to him; chance forms the characterof Paul I of Russia who recognizes his government; chance contrives aplot against him which not only fails to harm him but confirms hispower. Chance puts the Duc d'Enghien in his hands and unexpectedlycauses him to kill him--thereby convincing the mob more forcibly than inany other way that he had the right, since he had the might. Chancecontrives that though he directs all his efforts to prepare anexpedition against England (which would inevitably have ruined him) henever carries out that intention, but unexpectedly falls upon Mack andthe Austrians, who surrender without a battle. Chance and genius givehim the victory at Austerlitz; and by chance all men, not only theFrench but all Europe--except England which does not take part in theevents about to happen--despite their former horror and detestation ofhis crimes, now recognize his authority, the title he has given himself,and his ideal of grandeur and glory, which seems excellent andreasonable to them all.As if measuring themselves and preparing for the coming movement, thewestern forces push toward the east several times in 1805, 1806, 1807,and 1809, gaining strength and growing. In 1811 the group of people thathad formed in France unites into one group with the peoples of CentralEurope. The strength of the justification of the man who stands at thehead of the movement grows with the increased size of the group. Duringthe ten-year preparatory period this man had formed relations with allthe crowned heads of Europe. The discredited rulers of the world canoppose no reasonable ideal to the insensate Napoleonic ideal of gloryand grandeur. One after another they hasten to display theirinsignificance before him. The King of Prussia sends his wife to seekthe great man's mercy; the Emperor of Austria considers it a favor thatthis man receives a daughter of the Caesars into his bed; the Pope, theguardian of all that the nations hold sacred, utilizes religion for theaggrandizement of the great man. It is not Napoleon who prepares himselffor the accomplishment of his role, so much as all those round him whoprepare him to take on himself the whole responsibility for what ishappening and has to happen. There is no step, no crime or petty fraudhe commits, which in the mouths of those around him is not at oncerepresented as a great deed. The most suitable fete the Germans candevise for him is a celebration of Jena and Auerstadt. Not only is hegreat, but so are his ancestors, his brothers, his stepsons, and hisbrothers-in-law. Everything is done to deprive him of the remains of hisreason and to prepare him for his terrible part. And when he is ready sotoo are the forces.The invasion pushes eastward and reaches its final goal--Moscow. Thatcity is taken; the Russian army suffers heavier losses than the opposingarmies had suffered in the former war from Austerlitz to Wagram. Butsuddenly instead of those chances and that genius which hitherto had soconsistently led him by an uninterrupted series of successes to thepredestined goal, an innumerable sequence of inverse chances occur--fromthe cold in his head at Borodino to the sparks which set Moscow on fire,and the frosts--and instead of genius, stupidity and immeasurablebaseness become evident.The invaders flee, turn back, flee again, and all the chances are nownot for Napoleon but always against him.A countermovement is then accomplished from east to west with aremarkable resemblance to the preceding movement from west to east.Attempted drives from east to west--similar to the contrary movements of1805, 1807, and 1809--precede the great westward movement; there is thesame coalescence into a group of enormous dimensions; the same adhesionof the people of Central Europe to the movement; the same hesitationmidway, and the same increasing rapidity as the goal is approached.Paris, the ultimate goal, is reached. The Napoleonic government and armyare destroyed. Napoleon himself is no longer of any account; all hisactions are evidently pitiful and mean, but again an inexplicable chanceoccurs. The allies detest Napoleon whom they regard as the cause oftheir sufferings. Deprived of power and authority, his crimes and hiscraft exposed, he should have appeared to them what he appeared tenyears previously and one year later--an outlawed brigand. But by somestrange chance no one perceives this. His part is not yet ended. The manwho ten years before and a year later was considered an outlawed brigandis sent to an island two days' sail from France, which for some reasonis presented to him as his dominion, and guards are given to him andmillions of money are paid him.CHAPTER IVThe flood of nations begins to subside into its normal channels. Thewaves of the great movement abate, and on the calm surface eddies areformed in which float the diplomatists, who imagine that they havecaused the floods to abate.But the smooth sea again suddenly becomes disturbed. The diplomatiststhink that their disagreements are the cause of this fresh pressure ofnatural forces; they anticipate war between their sovereigns; theposition seems to them insoluble. But the wave they feel to be risingdoes not come from the quarter they expect. It rises again from the samepoint as before--Paris. The last backwash of the movement from the westoccurs: a backwash which serves to solve the apparently insuperablediplomatic difficulties and ends the military movement of that period ofhistory.The man who had devastated France returns to France alone, without anyconspiracy and without soldiers. Any guard might arrest him, but bystrange chance no one does so and all rapturously greet the man theycursed the day before and will curse again a month later.This man is still needed to justify the final collective act.That act is performed.The last role is played. The actor is bidden to disrobe and wash off hispowder and paint: he will not be wanted any more.And some years pass during which he plays a pitiful comedy to himself insolitude on his island, justifying his actions by intrigues and lieswhen the justification is no longer needed, and displaying to the wholeworld what it was that people had mistaken for strength as long as anunseen hand directed his actions.The manager having brought the drama to a close and stripped the actorshows him to us."See what you believed in! This is he! Do you now see that it was not hebut I who moved you?"But dazed by the force of the movement, it was long before peopleunderstood this.Still greater coherence and inevitability is seen in the life ofAlexander I, the man who stood at the head of the countermovement fromeast to west.What was needed for him who, overshadowing others, stood at the head ofthat movement from east to west?What was needed was a sense of justice and a sympathy with Europeanaffairs, but a remote sympathy not dulled by petty interests; a moralsuperiority over those sovereigns of the day who co-operated with him; amild and attractive personality; and a personal grievance againstNapoleon. And all this was found in Alexander I; all this had beenprepared by innumerable so-called chances in his life: his education,his early liberalism, the advisers who surrounded him, and byAusterlitz, and Tilsit, and Erfurt.During the national war he was inactive because he was not needed. Butas soon as the necessity for a general European war presented itself heappeared in his place at the given moment and, uniting the nations ofEurope, led them to the goal.The goal is reached. After the final war of 1815 Alexander possesses allpossible power. How does he use it?Alexander I--the pacifier of Europe, the man who from his early yearshad striven only for his people's welfare, the originator of the liberalinnovations in his fatherland--now that he seemed to possess the utmostpower and therefore to have the possibility of bringing about thewelfare of his peoples--at the time when Napoleon in exile was drawingup childish and mendacious plans of how he would have made mankind happyhad he retained power--Alexander I, having fulfilled his mission andfeeling the hand of God upon him, suddenly recognizes the insignificanceof that supposed power, turns away from it, and gives it into the handsof contemptible men whom he despises, saying only:"Not unto us, not unto us, but unto Thy Name!... I too am a man like therest of you. Let me live like a man and think of my soul and of God."As the sun and each atom of ether is a sphere complete in itself, andyet at the same time only a part of a whole too immense for man tocomprehend, so each individual has within himself his own aims and yethas them to serve a general purpose incomprehensible to man.A bee settling on a flower has stung a child. And the child is afraid ofbees and declares that bees exist to sting people. A poet admires thebee sucking from the chalice of a flower and says it exists to suck thefragrance of flowers. A beekeeper, seeing the bee collect pollen fromflowers and carry it to the hive, says that it exists to gather honey.Another beekeeper who has studied the life of the hive more closely saysthat the bee gathers pollen dust to feed the young bees and rear aqueen, and that it exists to perpetuate its race. A botanist noticesthat the bee flying with the pollen of a male flower to a pistilfertilizes the latter, and sees in this the purpose of the bee'sexistence. Another, observing the migration of plants, notices that thebee helps in this work, and may say that in this lies the purpose of thebee. But the ultimate purpose of the bee is not exhausted by the first,the second, or any of the processes the human mind can discern. Thehigher the human intellect rises in the discovery of these purposes, themore obvious it becomes, that the ultimate purpose is beyond ourcomprehension.All that is accessible to man is the relation of the life of the bee toother manifestations of life. And so it is with the purpose of historiccharacters and nations.CHAPTER VNatasha's wedding to Bezukhov, which took place in 1813, was the lasthappy event in the family of the old Rostovs. Count Ilya Rostov diedthat same year and, as always happens, after the father's death thefamily group broke up.The events of the previous year: the burning of Moscow and the flightfrom it, the death of Prince Andrew, Natasha's despair, Petya's death,and the old countess' grief fell blow after blow on the old count'shead. He seemed to be unable to understand the meaning of all theseevents, and bowed his old head in a spiritual sense as if expecting andinviting further blows which would finish him. He seemed now frightenedand distraught and now unnaturally animated and enterprising.The arrangements for Natasha's marriage occupied him for a while. Heordered dinners and suppers and obviously tried to appear cheerful, buthis cheerfulness was not infectious as it used to be: on the contrary itevoked the compassion of those who knew and liked him.When Pierre and his wife had left, he grew very quiet and began tocomplain of depression. A few days later he fell ill and took to hisbed. He realized from the first that he would not get up again, despitethe doctor's encouragement. The countess passed a fortnight in anarmchair by his pillow without undressing. Every time she gave him hismedicine he sobbed and silently kissed her hand. On his last day,sobbing, he asked her and his absent son to forgive him for havingdissipated their property--that being the chief fault of which he wasconscious. After receiving communion and unction he quietly died; andnext day a throng of acquaintances who came to pay their last respectsto the deceased filled the house rented by the Rostovs. All theseacquaintances, who had so often dined and danced at his house and had sooften laughed at him, now said, with a common feeling of self-reproachand emotion, as if justifying themselves: "Well, whatever he may havebeen he was a most worthy man. You don't meet such men nowadays.... Andwhich of us has not weaknesses of his own?"It was just when the count's affairs had become so involved that it wasimpossible to say what would happen if he lived another year that heunexpectedly died.Nicholas was with the Russian army in Paris when the news of hisfather's death reached him. He at once resigned his commission, andwithout waiting for it to be accepted took leave of absence and went toMoscow. The state of the count's affairs became quite obvious a monthafter his death, surprising everyone by the immense total of small debtsthe existence of which no one had suspected. The debts amounted todouble the value of the property.Friends and relations advised Nicholas to decline the inheritance. Buthe regarded such a refusal as a slur on his father's memory, which heheld sacred, and therefore would not hear of refusing and accepted theinheritance together with the obligation to pay the debts.The creditors who had so long been silent, restrained by a vague butpowerful influence exerted on them while he lived by the count'scareless good nature, all proceeded to enforce their claims at once. Asalways happens in such cases rivalry sprang up as to which should getpaid first, and those who like Mitenka held promissory notes given themas presents now became the most exacting of the creditors. Nicholas wasallowed no respite and no peace, and those who had seemed to pity theold man--the cause of their losses (if they were losses)--nowremorselessly pursued the young heir who had voluntarily undertaken thedebts and was obviously not guilty of contracting them.Not one of the plans Nicholas tried succeeded; the estate was sold byauction for half its value, and half the debts still remained unpaid.Nicholas accepted thirty thousand rubles offered him by his brother-in-law Bezukhov to pay off debts he regarded as genuinely due for valuereceived. And to avoid being imprisoned for the remainder, as thecreditors threatened, he re-entered the government service.He could not rejoin the army where he would have been made colonel atthe next vacancy, for his mother now clung to him as her one hold onlife; and so despite his reluctance to remain in Moscow among people whohad known him before, and despite his abhorrence of the civil service,he accepted a post in Moscow in that service, doffed the uniform ofwhich he was so fond, and moved with his mother and Sonya to a smallhouse on the Sivtsev Vrazhek.Natasha and Pierre were living in Petersburg at the time and had noclear idea of Nicholas' circumstances. Having borrowed money from hisbrother-in-law, Nicholas tried to hide his wretched condition from him.His position was the more difficult because with his salary of twelvehundred rubles he had not only to keep himself, his mother, and Sonya,but had to shield his mother from knowledge of their poverty. Thecountess could not conceive of life without the luxurious conditions shehad been used to from childhood and, unable to realize how hard it wasfor her son, kept demanding now a carriage (which they did not keep) tosend for a friend, now some expensive article of food for herself, orwine for her son, or money to buy a present as a surprise for Natasha orSonya, or for Nicholas himself.Sonya kept house, attended on her aunt, read to her, put up with herwhims and secret ill-will, and helped Nicholas to conceal their povertyfrom the old countess. Nicholas felt himself irredeemably indebted toSonya for all she was doing for his mother and greatly admired herpatience and devotion, but tried to keep aloof from her.He seemed in his heart to reproach her for being too perfect, andbecause there was nothing to reproach her with. She had all that peopleare valued for, but little that could have made him love her. He feltthat the more he valued her the less he loved her. He had taken her ather word when she wrote giving him his freedom and now behaved as if allthat had passed between them had been long forgotten and could never inany case be renewed.Nicholas' position became worse and worse. The idea of putting somethingaside out of his salary proved a dream. Not only did he not saveanything, but to comply with his mother's demands he even incurred somesmall debts. He could see no way out of this situation. The idea ofmarrying some rich woman, which was suggested to him by his femalerelations, was repugnant to him. The other way out--his mother's death--never entered his head. He wished for nothing and hoped for nothing, anddeep in his heart experienced a gloomy and stern satisfaction in anuncomplaining endurance of his position. He tried to avoid his oldacquaintances with their commiseration and offensive offers ofassistance; he avoided all distraction and recreation, and even at homedid nothing but play cards with his mother, pace silently up and downthe room, and smoke one pipe after another. He seemed carefully tocherish within himself the gloomy mood which alone enabled him to endurehis position.CHAPTER VIAt the beginning of winter Princess Mary came to Moscow. From reportscurrent in town she learned how the Rostovs were situated, and how "theson has sacrificed himself for his mother," as people were saying."I never expected anything else of him," said Princess Mary to herself,feeling a joyous sense of her love for him. Remembering her friendlyrelations with all the Rostovs which had made her almost a member of thefamily, she thought it her duty to go to see them. But remembering herrelations with Nicholas in Voronezh she was shy about doing so. Making agreat effort she did however go to call on them a few weeks after herarrival in Moscow.Nicholas was the first to meet her, as the countess' room could only bereached through his. But instead of being greeted with pleasure as shehad expected, at his first glance at her his face assumed a cold, stiff,proud expression she had not seen on it before. He inquired about herhealth, led the way to his mother, and having sat there for five minutesleft the room.When the princess came out of the countess' room Nicholas met her again,and with marked solemnity and stiffness accompanied her to the anteroom.To her remarks about his mother's health he made no reply. "What's thatto you? Leave me in peace," his looks seemed to say."Why does she come prowling here? What does she want? I can't bear theseladies and all these civilities!" said he aloud in Sonya's presence,evidently unable to repress his vexation, after the princess' carriagehad disappeared."Oh, Nicholas, how can you talk like that?" cried Sonya, hardly able toconceal her delight. "She is so kind and Mamma is so fond of her!"Nicholas did not reply and tried to avoid speaking of the princess anymore. But after her visit the old countess spoke of her several times aday.She sang her praises, insisted that her son must call on her, expresseda wish to see her often, but yet always became ill-humored when shebegan to talk about her.Nicholas tried to keep silence when his mother spoke of the princess,but his silence irritated her."She is a very admirable and excellent young woman," said she, "and youmust go and call on her. You would at least be seeing somebody, and Ithink it must be dull for you only seeing us.""But I don't in the least want to, Mamma.""You used to want to, and now you don't. Really I don't understand you,my dear. One day you are dull, and the next you refuse to see anyone.""But I never said I was dull.""Why, you said yourself you don't want even to see her. She is a veryadmirable young woman and you always liked her, but now suddenly youhave got some notion or other in your head. You hide everything fromme.""Not at all, Mamma.""If I were asking you to do something disagreeable now--but I only askyou to return a call. One would think mere politeness required it....Well, I have asked you, and now I won't interfere any more since youhave secrets from your mother.""Well, then, I'll go if you wish it.""It doesn't matter to me. I only wish it for your sake."Nicholas sighed, bit his mustache, and laid out the cards for apatience, trying to divert his mother's attention to another topic.The same conversation was repeated next day and the day after, and theday after that.After her visit to the Rostovs and her unexpectedly chilly reception byNicholas, Princess Mary confessed to herself that she had been right innot wishing to be the first to call."I expected nothing else," she told herself, calling her pride to heraid. "I have nothing to do with him and I only wanted to see the oldlady, who was always kind to me and to whom I am under manyobligations."But she could not pacify herself with these reflections; a feeling akinto remorse troubled her when she thought of her visit. Though she hadfirmly resolved not to call on the Rostovs again and to forget the wholematter, she felt herself all the time in an awkward position. And whenshe asked herself what distressed her, she had to admit that it was herrelation to Rostov. His cold, polite manner did not express his feelingfor her (she knew that) but it concealed something, and until she coulddiscover what that something was, she felt that she could not be atease.One day in midwinter when sitting in the schoolroom attending to hernephew's lessons, she was informed that Rostov had called. With a firmresolution not to betray herself and not show her agitation, she sentfor Mademoiselle Bourienne and went with her to the drawing room.Her first glance at Nicholas' face told her that he had only come tofulfill the demands of politeness, and she firmly resolved to maintainthe tone in which he addressed her.They spoke of the countess' health, of their mutual friends, of thelatest war news, and when the ten minutes required by propriety hadelapsed after which a visitor may rise, Nicholas got up to say good-by.With Mademoiselle Bourienne's help the princess had maintained theconversation very well, but at the very last moment, just when he rose,she was so tired of talking of what did not interest her, and her mindwas so full of the question why she alone was granted so littlehappiness in life, that in a fit of absent-mindedness she sat still, herluminous eyes gazing fixedly before her, not noticing that he had risen.Nicholas glanced at her and, wishing to appear not to notice herabstraction, made some remark to Mademoiselle Bourienne and then againlooked at the princess. She still sat motionless with a look ofsuffering on her gentle face. He suddenly felt sorry for her and wasvaguely conscious that he might be the cause of the sadness her faceexpressed. He wished to help her and say something pleasant, but couldthink of nothing to say."Good-bye, Princess!" said he.She started, flushed, and sighed deeply."Oh, I beg your pardon," she said as if waking up. "Are you goingalready, Count? Well then, good-by! Oh, but the cushion for thecountess!""Wait a moment, I'll fetch it," said Mademoiselle Bourienne, and sheleft the room.They both sat silent, with an occasional glance at one another."Yes, Princess," said Nicholas at last with a sad smile, "it doesn'tseem long ago since we first met at Bogucharovo, but how much water hasflowed since then! In what distress we all seemed to be then, yet Iwould give much to bring back that time... but there's no bringing itback."Princess Mary gazed intently into his eyes with her own luminous ones ashe said this. She seemed to be trying to fathom the hidden meaning ofhis words which would explain his feeling for her."Yes, yes," said she, "but you have no reason to regret the past, Count.As I understand your present life, I think you will always recall itwith satisfaction, because the self-sacrifice that fills it now...""I cannot accept your praise," he interrupted her hurriedly. "On thecontrary I continually reproach myself.... But this is not at all aninteresting or cheerful subject."His face again resumed its former stiff and cold expression. But theprincess had caught a glimpse of the man she had known and loved, and itwas to him that she now spoke."I thought you would allow me to tell you this," she said. "I had comeso near to you... and to all your family that I thought you would notconsider my sympathy misplaced, but I was mistaken," and suddenly hervoice trembled. "I don't know why," she continued, recovering herself,"but you used to be different, and...""There are a thousand reasons why," laying special emphasis on the why."Thank you, Princess," he added softly. "Sometimes it is hard.""So that's why! That's why!" a voice whispered in Princess Mary's soul."No, it was not only that gay, kind, and frank look, not only thathandsome exterior, that I loved in him. I divined his noble, resolute,self-sacrificing spirit too," she said to herself. "Yes, he is poor nowand I am rich.... Yes, that's the only reason.... Yes, were it not forthat..." And remembering his former tenderness, and looking now at hiskind, sorrowful face, she suddenly understood the cause of his coldness."But why, Count, why?" she almost cried, unconsciously moving closer tohim. "Why? Tell me. You must tell me!"He was silent."I don't understand your why, Count," she continued, "but it's hard forme... I confess it. For some reason you wish to deprive me of our formerfriendship. And that hurts me." There were tears in her eyes and in hervoice. "I have had so little happiness in life that every loss is hardfor me to bear.... Excuse me, good-by!" and suddenly she began to cryand was hurrying from the room."Princess, for God's sake!" he exclaimed, trying to stop her."Princess!"She turned round. For a few seconds they gazed silently into oneanother's eyes--and what had seemed impossible and remote suddenlybecame possible, inevitable, and very near.CHAPTER VIIIn the winter of 1813 Nicholas married Princess Mary and moved to BaldHills with his wife, his mother, and Sonya.Within four years he had paid off all his remaining debts withoutselling any of his wife's property, and having received a smallinheritance on the death of a cousin he paid his debt to Pierre as well.In another three years, by 1820, he had so managed his affairs that hewas able to buy a small estate adjoining Bald Hills and was negotiatingto buy back Otradnoe--that being his pet dream.Having started farming from necessity, he soon grew so devoted to itthat it became his favorite and almost his sole occupation. Nicholas wasa plain farmer: he did not like innovations, especially the English onesthen coming into vogue. He laughed at theoretical treatises on estatemanagement, disliked factories, the raising of expensive products, andthe buying of expensive seed corn, and did not make a hobby of anyparticular part of the work on his estate. He always had before hismind's eye the estate as a whole and not any particular part of it. Thechief thing in his eyes was not the nitrogen in the soil, nor the oxygenin the air, nor manures, nor special plows, but that most importantagent by which nitrogen, oxygen, manure, and plow were made effective--the peasant laborer. When Nicholas first began farming and began tounderstand its different branches, it was the serf who especiallyattracted his attention. The peasant seemed to him not merely a tool,but also a judge of farming and an end in himself. At first he watchedthe serfs, trying to understand their aims and what they considered goodand bad, and only pretended to direct them and give orders while inreality learning from them their methods, their manner of speech, andtheir judgment of what was good and bad. Only when he had understood thepeasants' tastes and aspirations, had learned to talk their language, tograsp the hidden meaning of their words, and felt akin to them did hebegin boldly to manage his serfs, that is, to perform toward them theduties demanded of him. And Nicholas' management produced very brilliantresults.Guided by some gift of insight, on taking up the management of theestates he at once unerringly appointed as bailiff, village elder, anddelegate, the very men the serfs would themselves have chosen had theyhad the right to choose, and these posts never changed hands. Beforeanalyzing the properties of manure, before entering into the debit andcredit (as he ironically called it), he found out how many cattle thepeasants had and increased the number by all possible means. He kept thepeasant families together in the largest groups possible, not allowingthe family groups to divide into separate households. He was hard alikeon the lazy, the depraved, and the weak, and tried to get them expelledfrom the commune.He was as careful of the sowing and reaping of the peasants' hay andcorn as of his own, and few landowners had their crops sown andharvested so early and so well, or got so good a return, as didNicholas.He disliked having anything to do with the domestic serfs--the "drones"as he called them--and everyone said he spoiled them by his laxity. Whena decision had to be taken regarding a domestic serf, especially if onehad to be punished, he always felt undecided and consulted everybody inthe house; but when it was possible to have a domestic serf conscriptedinstead of a land worker he did so without the least hesitation. Henever felt any hesitation in dealing with the peasants. He knew that hisevery decision would be approved by them all with very few exceptions.He did not allow himself either to be hard on or punish a man, or tomake things easy for or reward anyone, merely because he felt inclinedto do so. He could not have said by what standard he judged what heshould or should not do, but the standard was quite firm and definite inhis own mind.Often, speaking with vexation of some failure or irregularity, he wouldsay: "What can one do with our Russian peasants?" and imagined that hecould not bear them.Yet he loved "our Russian peasants" and their way of life with his wholesoul, and for that very reason had understood and assimilated the oneway and manner of farming which produced good results.Countess Mary was jealous of this passion of her husband's and regrettedthat she could not share it; but she could not understand the joys andvexations he derived from that world, to her so remote and alien. Shecould not understand why he was so particularly animated and happy when,after getting up at daybreak and spending the whole morning in thefields or on the threshing floor, he returned from the sowing or mowingor reaping to have tea with her. She did not understand why he spokewith such admiration and delight of the farming of the thrifty and well-to-do peasant Matthew Ermishin, who with his family had carted corn allnight; or of the fact that his (Nicholas') sheaves were already stackedbefore anyone else had his harvest in. She did not understand why hestepped out from the window to the veranda and smiled under his mustacheand winked so joyfully, when warm steady rain began to fall on the dryand thirsty shoots of the young oats, or why when the wind carried awaya threatening cloud during the hay harvest he would return from thebarn, flushed, sunburned, and perspiring, with a smell of wormwood andgentian in his hair and, gleefully rubbing his hands, would say: "Well,one more day and my grain and the peasants' will all be under cover."Still less did she understand why he, kindhearted and always ready toanticipate her wishes, should become almost desperate when she broughthim a petition from some peasant men or women who had appealed to her tobe excused some work; why he, that kind Nicholas, should obstinatelyrefuse her, angrily asking her not to interfere in what was not herbusiness. She felt he had a world apart, which he loved passionately andwhich had laws she had not fathomed.Sometimes when, trying to understand him, she spoke of the good work hewas doing for his serfs, he would be vexed and reply: "Not in the least;it never entered my head and I wouldn't do that for their good! That'sall poetry and old wives' talk--all that doing good to one's neighbor!What I want is that our children should not have to go begging. I mustput our affairs in order while I am alive, that's all. And to do that,order and strictness are essential.... That's all about it!" said he,clenching his vigorous fist. "And fairness, of course," he added, "forif the peasant is naked and hungry and has only one miserable horse, hecan do no good either for himself or for me."And all Nicholas did was fruitful--probably just because he refused toallow himself to think that he was doing good to others for virtue'ssake. His means increased rapidly; serfs from neighboring estates cameto beg him to buy them, and long after his death the memory of hisadministration was devoutly preserved among the serfs. "He was amaster... the peasants' affairs first and then his own. Of course he wasnot to be trifled with either--in a word, he was a real master!"CHAPTER VIIIOne matter connected with his management sometimes worried Nicholas, andthat was his quick temper together with his old hussar habit of makingfree use of his fists. At first he saw nothing reprehensible in this,but in the second year of his marriage his view of that form ofpunishment suddenly changed.Once in summer he had sent for the village elder from Bogucharovo, a manwho had succeeded to the post when Dron died and who was accused ofdishonesty and various irregularities. Nicholas went out into the porchto question him, and immediately after the elder had given a few repliesthe sound of cries and blows were heard. On returning to lunch Nicholaswent up to his wife, who sat with her head bent low over her embroideryframe, and as usual began to tell her what he had been doing thatmorning. Among other things he spoke of the Bogucharovo elder. CountessMary turned red and then pale, but continued to sit with head bowed andlips compressed and gave her husband no reply."Such an insolent scoundrel!" he cried, growing hot again at the mererecollection of him. "If he had told me he was drunk and did not see...But what is the matter with you, Mary?" he suddenly asked.Countess Mary raised her head and tried to speak, but hastily lookeddown again and her lips puckered."Why, whatever is the matter, my dearest?"The looks of the plain Countess Mary always improved when she was intears. She never cried from pain or vexation, but always from sorrow orpity, and when she wept her radiant eyes acquired an irresistible charm.The moment Nicholas took her hand she could no longer restrain herselfand began to cry."Nicholas, I saw it... he was to blame, but why do you... Nicholas!" andshe covered her face with her hands.Nicholas said nothing. He flushed crimson, left her side, and paced upand down the room. He understood what she was weeping about, but couldnot in his heart at once agree with her that what he had regarded fromchildhood as quite an everyday event was wrong. "Is it justsentimentality, old wives' tales, or is she right?" he asked himself.Before he had solved that point he glanced again at her face filled withlove and pain, and he suddenly realized that she was right and that hehad long been sinning against himself."Mary," he said softly, going up to her, "it will never happen again; Igive you my word. Never," he repeated in a trembling voice like a boyasking for forgiveness.The tears flowed faster still from the countess' eyes. She took his handand kissed it."Nicholas, when did you break your cameo?" she asked to change thesubject, looking at his finger on which he wore a ring with a cameo ofLaocoon's head."Today--it was the same affair. Oh, Mary, don't remind me of it!" andagain he flushed. "I give you my word of honor it shan't occur again,and let this always be a reminder to me," and he pointed to the brokenring.After that, when in discussions with his village elders or stewards theblood rushed to his face and his fists began to clench, Nicholas wouldturn the broken ring on his finger and would drop his eyes before theman who was making him angry. But he did forget himself once or twicewithin a twelvemonth, and then he would go and confess to his wife, andwould again promise that this should really be the very last time."Mary, you must despise me!" he would say. "I deserve it.""You should go, go away at once, if you don't feel strong enough tocontrol yourself," she would reply sadly, trying to comfort her husband.Among the gentry of the province Nicholas was respected but not liked.He did not concern himself with the interests of his own class, andconsequently some thought him proud and others thought him stupid. Thewhole summer, from spring sowing to harvest, he was busy with the workon his farm. In autumn he gave himself up to hunting with the samebusiness-like seriousness--leaving home for a month, or even two, withhis hunt. In winter he visited his other villages or spent his timereading. The books he read were chiefly historical, and on these hespent a certain sum every year. He was collecting, as he said, a seriouslibrary, and he made it a rule to read through all the books he bought.He would sit in his study with a grave air, reading--a task he firstimposed upon himself as a duty, but which afterwards became a habitaffording him a special kind of pleasure and a consciousness of beingoccupied with serious matters. In winter, except for businessexcursions, he spent most of his time at home making himself one withhis family and entering into all the details of his children's relationswith their mother. The harmony between him and his wife grew closer andcloser and he daily discovered fresh spiritual treasures in her.From the time of his marriage Sonya had lived in his house. Before that,Nicholas had told his wife all that had passed between himself andSonya, blaming himself and commending her. He had asked Princess Mary tobe gentle and kind to his cousin. She thoroughly realized the wrong hehad done Sonya, felt herself to blame toward her, and imagined that herwealth had influenced Nicholas' choice. She could not find fault withSonya in any way and tried to be fond of her, but often felt ill-willtoward her which she could not overcome.Once she had a talk with her friend Natasha about Sonya and about herown injustice toward her."You know," said Natasha, "you have read the Gospels a great deal--thereis a passage in them that just fits Sonya.""What?" asked Countess Mary, surprised."'To him that hath shall be given, and from him that hath not shall betaken away.' You remember? She is one that hath not; why, I don't know.Perhaps she lacks egotism, I don't know, but from her is taken away, andeverything has been taken away. Sometimes I am dreadfully sorry for her.Formerly I very much wanted Nicholas to marry her, but I always had asort of presentiment that it would not come off. She is a sterileflower, you know--like some strawberry blossoms. Sometimes I am sorryfor her, and sometimes I think she doesn't feel it as you or I would."Though Countess Mary told Natasha that those words in the Gospel must beunderstood differently, yet looking at Sonya she agreed with Natasha'sexplanation. It really seemed that Sonya did not feel her positiontrying, and had grown quite reconciled to her lot as a sterile flower.She seemed to be fond not so much of individuals as of the family as awhole. Like a cat, she had attached herself not to the people but to thehome. She waited on the old countess, petted and spoiled the children,was always ready to render the small services for which she had a gift,and all this was unconsciously accepted from her with insufficientgratitude.The country seat at Bald Hills had been rebuilt, though not on the samescale as under the old prince.The buildings, begun under straitened circumstances, were more thansimple. The immense house on the old stone foundations was of wood,plastered only inside. It had bare deal floors and was furnished withvery simple hard sofas, armchairs, tables, and chairs made by their ownserf carpenters out of their own birchwood. The house was spacious andhad rooms for the house serfs and apartments for visitors. Wholefamilies of the Rostovs' and Bolkonskis' relations sometimes came toBald Hills with sixteen horses and dozens of servants and stayed formonths. Besides that, four times a year, on the name days and birthdaysof the hosts, as many as a hundred visitors would gather there for a dayor two. The rest of the year life pursued its unbroken routine with itsordinary occupations, and its breakfasts, lunches, dinners, and suppers,provided out of the produce of the estate.CHAPTER IXIt was the eve of St. Nicholas, the fifth of December, 1820. Natasha hadbeen staying at her brother's with her husband and children since earlyautumn. Pierre had gone to Petersburg on business of his own for threeweeks as he said, but had remained there nearly seven weeks and wasexpected back every minute.Besides the Bezukhov family, Nicholas' old friend the retired GeneralVasili Dmitrich Denisov was staying with the Rostovs this fifth ofDecember.On the sixth, which was his name day when the house would be full ofvisitors, Nicholas knew he would have to exchange his Tartar tunic for atail coat, and put on narrow boots with pointed toes, and drive to thenew church he had built, and then receive visitors who would come tocongratulate him, offer them refreshments, and talk about the electionsof the nobility; but he considered himself entitled to spend the eve ofthat day in his usual way. He examined the bailiff's accounts of thevillage in Ryazan which belonged to his wife's nephew, wrote twobusiness letters, and walked over to the granaries, cattle yards andstables before dinner. Having taken precautions against the generaldrunkenness to be expected on the morrow because it was a great saint'sday, he returned to dinner, and without having time for a private talkwith his wife sat down at the long table laid for twenty persons, atwhich the whole household had assembled. At that table were his mother,his mother's old lady companion Belova, his wife, their three childrenwith their governess and tutor, his wife's nephew with his tutor, Sonya,Denisov, Natasha, her three children, their governess, and old MichaelIvanovich, the late prince's architect, who was living on in retirementat Bald Hills.Countess Mary sat at the other end of the table. When her husband tookhis place she concluded, from the rapid manner in which after taking uphis table napkin he pushed back the tumbler and wineglass standingbefore him, that he was out of humor, as was sometimes the case when hecame in to dinner straight from the farm--especially before the soup.Countess Mary well knew that mood of his, and when she herself was in agood frame of mind quietly waited till he had had his soup and thenbegan to talk to him and make him admit that there was no cause for hisill-humor. But today she quite forgot that and was hurt that he shouldbe angry with her without any reason, and she felt unhappy. She askedhim where he had been. He replied. She again inquired whether everythingwas going well on the farm. Her unnatural tone made him winceunpleasantly and he replied hastily."Then I'm not mistaken," thought Countess Mary. "Why is he cross withme?" She concluded from his tone that he was vexed with her and wishedto end the conversation. She knew her remarks sounded unnatural, butcould not refrain from asking some more questions.Thanks to Denisov the conversation at table soon became general andlively, and she did not talk to her husband. When they left the tableand went as usual to thank the old countess, Countess Mary held out herhand and kissed her husband, and asked him why he was angry with her."You always have such strange fancies! I didn't even think of beingangry," he replied.But the word always seemed to her to imply: "Yes, I am angry but I won'ttell you why."Nicholas and his wife lived together so happily that even Sonya and theold countess, who felt jealous and would have liked them to disagree,could find nothing to reproach them with; but even they had theirmoments of antagonism. Occasionally, and it was always just after theyhad been happiest together, they suddenly had a feeling of estrangementand hostility, which occurred most frequently during Countess Mary'spregnancies, and this was such a time."Well, messieurs et mesdames," said Nicholas loudly and with apparentcheerfulness (it seemed to Countess Mary that he did it on purpose tovex her), "I have been on my feet since six this morning. Tomorrow Ishall have to suffer, so today I'll go and rest."And without a word to his wife he went to the little sitting room andlay down on the sofa."That's always the way," thought Countess Mary. "He talks to everyoneexcept me. I see... I see that I am repulsive to him, especially when Iam in this condition." She looked down at her expanded figure and in theglass at her pale, sallow, emaciated face in which her eyes now lookedlarger than ever.And everything annoyed her--Denisov's shouting and laughter, Natasha'stalk, and especially a quick glance Sonya gave her.Sonya was always the first excuse Countess Mary found for feelingirritated.Having sat awhile with her visitors without understanding anything ofwhat they were saying, she softly left the room and went to the nursery.The children were playing at "going to Moscow" in a carriage made ofchairs and invited her to go with them. She sat down and played withthem a little, but the thought of her husband and his unreasonablecrossness worried her. She got up and, walking on tiptoe withdifficulty, went to the small sitting room."Perhaps he is not asleep; I'll have an explanation with him," she saidto herself. Little Andrew, her eldest boy, imitating his mother,followed her on tiptoe. She did not notice him."Mary, dear, I think he is asleep--he was so tired," said Sonya, meetingher in the large sitting room (it seemed to Countess Mary that shecrossed her path everywhere). "Andrew may wake him."Countess Mary looked round, saw little Andrew following her, felt thatSonya was right, and for that very reason flushed and with evidentdifficulty refrained from saying something harsh. She made no reply, butto avoid obeying Sonya beckoned to Andrew to follow her quietly and wentto the door. Sonya went away by another door. From the room in whichNicholas was sleeping came the sound of his even breathing, everyslightest tone of which was familiar to his wife. As she listened to itshe saw before her his smooth handsome forehead, his mustache, and hiswhole face, as she had so often seen it in the stillness of the nightwhen he slept. Nicholas suddenly moved and cleared his throat. And atthat moment little Andrew shouted from outside the door: "Papa! Mamma'sstanding here!" Countess Mary turned pale with fright and made signs tothe boy. He grew silent, and quiet ensued for a moment, terrible toCountess Mary. She knew how Nicholas disliked being waked. Then throughthe door she heard Nicholas clearing his throat again and stirring, andhis voice said crossly:"I can't get a moment's peace.... Mary, is that you? Why did you bringhim here?""I only came in to look and did not notice... forgive me..."Nicholas coughed and said no more. Countess Mary moved away from thedoor and took the boy back to the nursery. Five minutes later littleblack-eyed three-year-old Natasha, her father's pet, having learned fromher brother that Papa was asleep and Mamma was in the sitting room, ranto her father unobserved by her mother. The dark-eyed little girl boldlyopened the creaking door, went up to the sofa with energetic steps ofher sturdy little legs, and having examined the position of her father,who was asleep with his back to her, rose on tiptoe and kissed the handwhich lay under his head. Nicholas turned with a tender smile on hisface."Natasha, Natasha!" came Countess Mary's frightened whisper from thedoor. "Papa wants to sleep.""No, Mamma, he doesn't want to sleep," said little Natasha withconviction. "He's laughing."Nicholas lowered his legs, rose, and took his daughter in his arms."Come in, Mary," he said to his wife.She went in and sat down by her husband."I did not notice him following me," she said timidly. "I just lookedin."Holding his little girl with one arm, Nicholas glanced at his wife and,seeing her guilty expression, put his other arm around her and kissedher hair."May I kiss Mamma?" he asked Natasha.Natasha smiled bashfully."Again!" she commanded, pointing with a peremptory gesture to the spotwhere Nicholas had placed the kiss."I don't know why you think I am cross," said Nicholas, replying to thequestion he knew was in his wife's mind."You have no idea how unhappy, how lonely, I feel when you are likethat. It always seems to me...""Mary, don't talk nonsense. You ought to be ashamed of yourself!" hesaid gaily."It seems to be that you can't love me, that I am so plain... always...and now... in this cond...""Oh, how absurd you are! It is not beauty that endears, it's love thatmakes us see beauty. It is only Malvinas and women of that kind who areloved for their beauty. But do I love my wife? I don't love her, but...I don't know how to put it. Without you, or when something comes betweenus like this, I seem lost and can't do anything. Now do I love myfinger? I don't love it, but just try to cut it off!""I'm not like that myself, but I understand. So you're not angry withme?""Awfully angry!" he said, smiling and getting up. And smoothing his hairhe began to pace the room."Do you know, Mary, what I've been thinking?" he began, immediatelythinking aloud in his wife's presence now that they had made it up.He did not ask if she was ready to listen to him. He did not care. Athought had occurred to him and so it belonged to her also. And he toldher of his intention to persuade Pierre to stay with them till spring.Countess Mary listened till he had finished, made some remark, and inher turn began thinking aloud. Her thoughts were about the children."You can see the woman in her already," she said in French, pointing tolittle Natasha. "You reproach us women with being illogical. Here is ourlogic. I say: 'Papa wants to sleep!' but she says, 'No, he's laughing.'And she was right," said Countess Mary with a happy smile."Yes, yes." And Nicholas, taking his little daughter in his strong hand,lifted her high, placed her on his shoulder, held her by the legs, andpaced the room with her. There was an expression of carefree happinesson the faces of both father and daughter."But you know you may be unfair. You are too fond of this one," his wifewhispered in French."Yes, but what am I to do?... I try not to show..."At that moment they heard the sound of the door pulley and footsteps inthe hall and anteroom, as if someone had arrived."Somebody has come.""I am sure it is Pierre. I will go and see," said Countess Mary and leftthe room.In her absence Nicholas allowed himself to give his little daughter agallop round the room. Out of breath, he took the laughing child quicklyfrom his shoulder and pressed her to his heart. His capers reminded himof dancing, and looking at the child's round happy little face hethought of what she would be like when he was an old man, taking herinto society and dancing the mazurka with her as his old father haddanced Daniel Cooper with his daughter."It is he, it is he, Nicholas!" said Countess Mary, re-entering the rooma few minutes later. "Now our Natasha has come to life. You should haveseen her ecstasy, and how he caught it for having stayed away so long.Well, come along now, quick, quick! It's time you two were parted," sheadded, looking smilingly at the little girl who clung to her father.Nicholas went out holding the child by the hand.Countess Mary remained in the sitting room."I should never, never have believed that one could be so happy," shewhispered to herself. A smile lit up her face but at the same time shesighed, and her deep eyes expressed a quiet sadness as though she felt,through her happiness, that there is another sort of happinessunattainable in this life and of which she involuntarily thought at thatinstant.CHAPTER XNatasha had married in the early spring of 1813, and in 1820 already hadthree daughters besides a son for whom she had longed and whom she wasnow nursing. She had grown stouter and broader, so that it was difficultto recognize in this robust, motherly woman the slim, lively Natasha offormer days. Her features were more defined and had a calm, soft, andserene expression. In her face there was none of the ever-glowinganimation that had formerly burned there and constituted its charm. Nowher face and body were often all that one saw, and her soul was notvisible at all. All that struck the eye was a strong, handsome, andfertile woman. The old fire very rarely kindled in her face now. Thathappened only when, as was the case that day, her husband returned home,or a sick child was convalescent, or when she and Countess Mary spoke ofPrince Andrew (she never mentioned him to her husband, who she imaginedwas jealous of Prince Andrew's memory), or on the rare occasions whensomething happened to induce her to sing, a practice she had quiteabandoned since her marriage. At the rare moments when the old fire didkindle in her handsome, fully developed body she was even moreattractive than in former days.Since their marriage Natasha and her husband had lived in Moscow, inPetersburg, on their estate near Moscow, or with her mother, that is tosay, in Nicholas' house. The young Countess Bezukhova was not often seenin society, and those who met her there were not pleased with her andfound her neither attractive nor amiable. Not that Natasha likedsolitude--she did not know whether she liked it or not, she even thoughtthat she did not--but with her pregnancies, her confinements, thenursing of her children, and sharing every moment of her husband's life,she had demands on her time which could be satisfied only by renouncingsociety. All who had known Natasha before her marriage wondered at thechange in her as at something extraordinary. Only the old countess withher maternal instinct had realized that all Natasha's outbursts had beendue to her need of children and a husband--as she herself had onceexclaimed at Otradnoe not so much in fun as in earnest--and her motherwas now surprised at the surprise expressed by those who had neverunderstood Natasha, and she kept saying that she had always known thatNatasha would make an exemplary wife and mother."Only she lets her love of her husband and children overflow allbounds," said the countess, "so that it even becomes absurd."Natasha did not follow the golden rule advocated by clever folk,especially by the French, which says that a girl should not let herselfgo when she marries, should not neglect her accomplishments, should beeven more careful of her appearance than when she was unmarried, andshould fascinate her husband as much as she did before he became herhusband. Natasha on the contrary had at once abandoned all her witchery,of which her singing had been an unusually powerful part. She gave it upjust because it was so powerfully seductive. She took no pains with hermanners or with delicacy of speech, or with her toilet, or to showherself to her husband in her most becoming attitudes, or to avoidinconveniencing him by being too exacting. She acted in contradiction toall those rules. She felt that the allurements instinct had formerlytaught her to use would now be merely ridiculous in the eyes of herhusband, to whom she had from the first moment given herself upentirely--that is, with her whole soul, leaving no corner of it hiddenfrom him. She felt that her unity with her husband was not maintained bythe poetic feelings that had attracted him to her, but by somethingelse--indefinite but firm as the bond between her own body and soul.To fluff out her curls, put on fashionable dresses, and sing romanticsongs to fascinate her husband would have seemed as strange as to adornherself to attract herself. To adorn herself for others might perhapshave been agreeable--she did not know--but she had no time at all forit. The chief reason for devoting no time either to singing, to dress,or to choosing her words was that she really had no time to spare forthese things.We know that man has the faculty of becoming completely absorbed in asubject however trivial it may be, and that there is no subject sotrivial that it will not grow to infinite proportions if one's entireattention is devoted to it.The subject which wholly engrossed Natasha's attention was her family:that is, her husband whom she had to keep so that he should belongentirely to her and to the home, and the children whom she had to bear,bring into the world, nurse, and bring up.And the deeper she penetrated, not with her mind only but with her wholesoul, her whole being, into the subject that absorbed her, the largerdid that subject grow and the weaker and more inadequate did her powersappear, so that she concentrated them wholly on that one thing and yetwas unable to accomplish all that she considered necessary.There were then as now conversations and discussions about women'srights, the relations of husband and wife and their freedom and rights,though these themes were not yet termed questions as they are now; butthese topics were not merely uninteresting to Natasha, she positivelydid not understand them.These questions, then as now, existed only for those who see nothing inmarriage but the pleasure married people get from one another, that is,only the beginnings of marriage and not its whole significance, whichlies in the family.Discussions and questions of that kind, which are like the question ofhow to get the greatest gratification from one's dinner, did not thenand do not now exist for those for whom the purpose of a dinner is thenourishment it affords; and the purpose of marriage is the family.If the purpose of dinner is to nourish the body, a man who eats twodinners at once may perhaps get more enjoyment but will not attain hispurpose, for his stomach will not digest the two dinners.If the purpose of marriage is the family, the person who wishes to havemany wives or husbands may perhaps obtain much pleasure, but in thatcase will not have a family.If the purpose of food is nourishment and the purpose of marriage is thefamily, the whole question resolves itself into not eating more than onecan digest, and not having more wives or husbands than are needed forthe family--that is, one wife or one husband. Natasha needed a husband.A husband was given her and he gave her a family. And she not only sawno need of any other or better husband, but as all the powers of hersoul were intent on serving that husband and family, she could notimagine and saw no interest in imagining how it would be if things weredifferent.Natasha did not care for society in general, but prized the more thesociety of her relatives--Countess Mary, and her brother, her mother,and Sonya. She valued the company of those to whom she could comestriding disheveled from the nursery in her dressing gown, and withjoyful face show a yellow instead of a green stain on baby's napkin, andfrom whom she could hear reassuring words to the effect that baby wasmuch better.To such an extent had Natasha let herself go that the way she dressedand did her hair, her ill-chosen words, and her jealousy--she wasjealous of Sonya, of the governess, and of every woman, pretty or plain--were habitual subjects of jest to those about her. The general opinionwas that Pierre was under his wife's thumb, which was really true. Fromthe very first days of their married life Natasha had announced herdemands. Pierre was greatly surprised by his wife's view, to him aperfectly novel one, that every moment of his life belonged to her andto the family. His wife's demands astonished him, but they alsoflattered him, and he submitted to them.Pierre's subjection consisted in the fact that he not only dared notflirt with, but dared not even speak smilingly to, any other woman; didnot dare dine at the club as a pastime, did not dare spend money on awhim, and did not dare absent himself for any length of time, except onbusiness--in which his wife included his intellectual pursuits, whichshe did not in the least understand but to which she attributed greatimportance. To make up for this, at home Pierre had the right toregulate his life and that of the whole family exactly as he chose. Athome Natasha placed herself in the position of a slave to her husband,and the whole household went on tiptoe when he was occupied--that is,was reading or writing in his study. Pierre had but to show a partialityfor anything to get just what he liked done always. He had only toexpress a wish and Natasha would jump up and run to fulfill it.The entire household was governed according to Pierre's supposed orders,that is, by his wishes which Natasha tried to guess. Their way of lifeand place of residence, their acquaintances and ties, Natasha'soccupations, the children's upbringing, were all selected not merelywith regard to Pierre's expressed wishes, but to what Natasha from thethoughts he expressed in conversation supposed his wishes to be. And shededuced the essentials of his wishes quite correctly, and having oncearrived at them clung to them tenaciously. When Pierre himself wanted tochange his mind she would fight him with his own weapons.Thus in a time of trouble ever memorable to him after the birth of theirfirst child who was delicate, when they had to change the wet nursethree times and Natasha fell ill from despair, Pierre one day told herof Rousseau's view, with which he quite agreed, that to have a wet nurseis unnatural and harmful. When her next baby was born, despite theopposition of her mother, the doctors, and even of her husband himself--who were all vigorously opposed to her nursing her baby herself, a thingthen unheard of and considered injurious--she insisted on having her ownway, and after that nursed all her babies herself.It very often happened that in a moment of irritation husband and wifewould have a dispute, but long afterwards Pierre to his surprise anddelight would find in his wife's ideas and actions the very thoughtagainst which she had argued, but divested of everything superfluousthat in the excitement of the dispute he had added when expressing hisopinion.After seven years of marriage Pierre had the joyous and firmconsciousness that he was not a bad man, and he felt this because he sawhimself reflected in his wife. He felt the good and bad within himselfinextricably mingled and overlapping. But only what was really good inhim was reflected in his wife, all that was not quite good was rejected.And this was not the result of logical reasoning but was a direct andmysterious reflection.CHAPTER XITwo months previously when Pierre was already staying with the Rostovshe had received a letter from Prince Theodore, asking him to come toPetersburg to confer on some important questions that were beingdiscussed there by a society of which Pierre was one of the principalfounders.On reading that letter (she always read her husband's letters) Natashaherself suggested that he should go to Petersburg, though she would feelhis absence very acutely. She attributed immense importance to all herhusband's intellectual and abstract interests though she did notunderstand them, and she always dreaded being a hindrance to him in suchmatters. To Pierre's timid look of inquiry after reading the letter shereplied by asking him to go, but to fix a definite date for his return.He was given four weeks' leave of absence.Ever since that leave of absence had expired, more than a fortnightbefore, Natasha had been in a constant state of alarm, depression, andirritability.Denisov, now a general on the retired list and much dissatisfied withthe present state of affairs, had arrived during that fortnight. Helooked at Natasha with sorrow and surprise as at a bad likeness of aperson once dear. A dull, dejected look, random replies, and talk aboutthe nursery was all he saw and heard from his former enchantress.Natasha was sad and irritable all that time, especially when her mother,her brother, Sonya, or Countess Mary in their efforts to console hertried to excuse Pierre and suggested reasons for his delay in returning."It's all nonsense, all rubbish--those discussions which lead to nothingand all those idiotic societies!" Natasha declared of the very affairsin the immense importance of which she firmly believed.And she would go to the nursery to nurse Petya, her only boy. No oneelse could tell her anything so comforting or so reasonable as thislittle three-month-old creature when he lay at her breast and she wasconscious of the movement of his lips and the snuffling of his littlenose. That creature said: "You are angry, you are jealous, you wouldlike to pay him out, you are afraid--but here am I! And I am he..." andthat was unanswerable. It was more than true.During that fortnight of anxiety Natasha resorted to the baby forcomfort so often, and fussed over him so much, that she overfed him andhe fell ill. She was terrified by his illness, and yet that was justwhat she needed. While attending to him she bore the anxiety about herhusband more easily.She was nursing her boy when the sound of Pierre's sleigh was heard atthe front door, and the old nurse--knowing how to please her mistress--entered the room inaudibly but hurriedly and with a beaming face."Has he come?" Natasha asked quickly in a whisper, afraid to move lestshe should rouse the dozing baby."He's come, ma'am," whispered the nurse.The blood rushed to Natasha's face and her feet involuntarily moved, butshe could not jump up and run out. The baby again opened his eyes andlooked at her. "You're here?" he seemed to be saying, and again lazilysmacked his lips.Cautiously withdrawing her breast, Natasha rocked him a little, handedhim to the nurse, and went with rapid steps toward the door. But at thedoor she stopped as if her conscience reproached her for having in herjoy left the child too soon, and she glanced round. The nurse withraised elbows was lifting the infant over the rail of his cot."Go, ma'am! Don't worry, go!" she whispered, smiling, with the kind offamiliarity that grows up between a nurse and her mistress.Natasha ran with light footsteps to the anteroom.Denisov, who had come out of the study into the dancing room with hispipe, now for the first time recognized the old Natasha. A flood ofbrilliant, joyful light poured from her transfigured face."He's come!" she exclaimed as she ran past, and Denisov felt that he toowas delighted that Pierre, whom he did not much care for, had returned.On reaching the vestibule Natasha saw a tall figure in a fur coatunwinding his scarf. "It's he! It's really he! He has come!" she said toherself, and rushing at him embraced him, pressed his head to herbreast, and then pushed him back and gazed at his ruddy, happy face,covered with hoarfrost. "Yes, it is he, happy and contented..."Then all at once she remembered the tortures of suspense she hadexperienced for the last fortnight, and the joy that had lit up her facevanished; she frowned and overwhelmed Pierre with a torrent ofreproaches and angry words."Yes, it's all very well for you. You are pleased, you've had a goodtime.... But what about me? You might at least have shown considerationfor the children. I am nursing and my milk was spoiled.... Petya was atdeath's door. But you were enjoying yourself. Yes, enjoying..."Pierre knew he was not to blame, for he could not have come sooner; heknew this outburst was unseemly and would blow over in a minute or two;above all he knew that he himself was bright and happy. He wanted tosmile but dared not even think of doing so. He made a piteous,frightened face and bent down."I could not, on my honor. But how is Petya?""All right now. Come along! I wonder you're not ashamed! If only youcould see what I was like without you, how I suffered!""You are well?""Come, come!" she said, not letting go of his arm. And they went totheir rooms.When Nicholas and his wife came to look for Pierre he was in the nurseryholding his baby son, who was again awake, on his huge right palm anddandling him. A blissful bright smile was fixed on the baby's broad facewith its toothless open mouth. The storm was long since over and therewas bright, joyous sunshine on Natasha's face as she gazed tenderly ather husband and child."And have you talked everything well over with Prince Theodore?" sheasked."Yes, capitally.""You see, he holds it up." (She meant the baby's head.) "But how he didfrighten me... You've seen the princess? Is it true she's in love withthat...""Yes, just fancy..."At that moment Nicholas and Countess Mary came in. Pierre with the babyon his hand stooped, kissed them, and replied to their inquiries. But inspite of much that was interesting and had to be discussed, the babywith the little cap on its unsteady head evidently absorbed all hisattention."How sweet!" said Countess Mary, looking at and playing with the baby."Now, Nicholas," she added, turning to her husband, "I can't understandhow it is you don't see the charm of these delicious marvels.""I don't and can't," replied Nicholas, looking coldly at the baby. "Alump of flesh. Come along, Pierre!""And yet he's such an affectionate father," said Countess Mary,vindicating her husband, "but only after they are a year old or so...""Now, Pierre nurses them splendidly," said Natasha. "He says his hand isjust made for a baby's seat. Just look!""Only not for this..." Pierre suddenly exclaimed with a laugh, andshifting the baby he gave him to the nurse.CHAPTER XIIAs in every large household, there were at Bald Hills several perfectlydistinct worlds which merged into one harmonious whole, though eachretained its own peculiarities and made concessions to the others. Everyevent, joyful or sad, that took place in that house was important to allthese worlds, but each had its own special reasons to rejoice or grieveover that occurrence independently of the others.For instance, Pierre's return was a joyful and important event and theyall felt it to be so.The servants--the most reliable judges of their masters because theyjudge not by their conversation or expressions of feeling but by theiracts and way of life--were glad of Pierre's return because they knewthat when he was there Count Nicholas would cease going every day toattend to the estate, and would be in better spirits and temper, andalso because they would all receive handsome presents for the holidays.The children and their governesses were glad of Pierre's return becauseno one else drew them into the social life of the household as he did.He alone could play on the clavichord that ecossaise (his only piece) towhich, as he said, all possible dances could be danced, and they feltsure he had brought presents for them all.Young Nicholas, now a slim lad of fifteen, delicate and intelligent,with curly light-brown hair and beautiful eyes, was delighted becauseUncle Pierre as he called him was the object of his rapturous andpassionate affection. No one had instilled into him this love for Pierrewhom he saw only occasionally. Countess Mary who had brought him up haddone her utmost to make him love her husband as she loved him, andlittle Nicholas did love his uncle, but loved him with just a shade ofcontempt. Pierre, however, he adored. He did not want to be an hussar ora Knight of St. George like his uncle Nicholas; he wanted to be learned,wise, and kind like Pierre. In Pierre's presence his face always shonewith pleasure and he flushed and was breathless when Pierre spoke tohim. He did not miss a single word he uttered, and would afterwards,with Dessalles or by himself, recall and reconsider the meaning ofeverything Pierre had said. Pierre's past life and his unhappiness priorto 1812 (of which young Nicholas had formed a vague poetic picture fromsome words he had overheard), his adventures in Moscow, his captivity,Platon Karataev (of whom he had heard from Pierre), his love for Natasha(of whom the lad was also particularly fond), and especially Pierre'sfriendship with the father whom Nicholas could not remember--all thismade Pierre in his eyes a hero and a saint.From broken remarks about Natasha and his father, from the emotion withwhich Pierre spoke of that dead father, and from the careful, reverenttenderness with which Natasha spoke of him, the boy, who was only justbeginning to guess what love is, derived the notion that his father hadloved Natasha and when dying had left her to his friend. But the fatherwhom the boy did not remember appeared to him a divinity who could notbe pictured, and of whom he never thought without a swelling heart andtears of sadness and rapture. So the boy also was happy that Pierre hadarrived.The guests welcomed Pierre because he always helped to enliven and uniteany company he was in.The grown-up members of the family, not to mention his wife, werepleased to have back a friend whose presence made life run more smoothlyand peacefully.The old ladies were pleased with the presents he brought them, andespecially that Natasha would now be herself again.Pierre felt the different outlooks of these various worlds and madehaste to satisfy all their expectations.Though the most absent-minded and forgetful of men, Pierre, with the aidof a list his wife drew up, had now bought everything, not forgettinghis mother--and brother-in-law's commissions, nor the dress material fora present to Belova, nor toys for his wife's nephews. In the early daysof his marriage it had seemed strange to him that his wife should expecthim not to forget to procure all the things he undertook to buy, and hehad been taken aback by her serious annoyance when on his first trip heforgot everything. But in time he grew used to this demand. Knowing thatNatasha asked nothing for herself, and gave him commissions for othersonly when he himself had offered to undertake them, he now found anunexpected and childlike pleasure in this purchase of presents foreveryone in the house, and never forgot anything. If he now incurredNatasha's censure it was only for buying too many and too expensivethings. To her other defects (as most people thought them, but which toPierre were qualities) of untidiness and neglect of herself, she nowadded stinginess.From the time that Pierre began life as a family man on a footingentailing heavy expenditure, he had noticed to his surprise that hespent only half as much as before, and that his affairs--which had beenin disorder of late, chiefly because of his first wife's debts--hadbegun to improve.Life was cheaper because it was circumscribed: that most expensiveluxury, the kind of life that can be changed at any moment, was nolonger his nor did he wish for it. He felt that his way of life had nowbeen settled once for all till death and that to change it was not inhis power, and so that way of life proved economical.With a merry, smiling face Pierre was sorting his purchases."What do you think of this?" said he, unrolling a piece of stuff like ashopman.Natasha, who was sitting opposite to him with her eldest daughter on herlap, turned her sparkling eyes swiftly from her husband to the things heshowed her."That's for Belova? Excellent!" She felt the quality of the material."It was a ruble an arshin, I suppose?"Pierre told her the price."Too dear!" Natasha remarked. "How pleased the children will be andMamma too! Only you need not have bought me this," she added, unable tosuppress a smile as she gazed admiringly at a gold comb set with pearls,of a kind then just coming into fashion."Adele tempted me: she kept on telling me to buy it," returned Pierre."When am I to wear it?" and Natasha stuck it in her coil of hair. "WhenI take little Masha into society? Perhaps they will be fashionable againby then. Well, let's go now."And collecting the presents they went first to the nursery and then tothe old countess' rooms.The countess was sitting with her companion Belova, playing grand-patience as usual, when Pierre and Natasha came into the drawing roomwith parcels under their arms.The countess was now over sixty, was quite gray, and wore a cap with afrill that surrounded her face. Her face had shriveled, her upper liphad sunk in, and her eyes were dim.After the deaths of her son and husband in such rapid succession, shefelt herself a being accidentally forgotten in this world and leftwithout aim or object for her existence. She ate, drank, slept, or keptawake, but did not live. Life gave her no new impressions. She wantednothing from life but tranquillity, and that tranquillity only deathcould give her. But until death came she had to go on living, that is,to use her vital forces. A peculiarity one sees in very young childrenand very old people was particularly evident in her. Her life had noexternal aims--only a need to exercise her various functions andinclinations was apparent. She had to eat, sleep, think, speak, weep,work, give vent to her anger, and so on, merely because she had astomach, a brain, muscles, nerves, and a liver. She did these things notunder any external impulse as people in the full vigor of life do, whenbehind the purpose for which they strive that of exercising theirfunctions remains unnoticed. She talked only because she physicallyneeded to exercise her tongue and lungs. She cried as a child does,because her nose had to be cleared, and so on. What for people in theirfull vigor is an aim was for her evidently merely a pretext.Thus in the morning--especially if she had eaten anything rich the daybefore--she felt a need of being angry and would choose as the handiestpretext Belova's deafness.She would begin to say something to her in a low tone from the other endof the room."It seems a little warmer today, my dear," she would murmur.And when Belova replied: "Oh yes, they've come," she would mutterangrily: "O Lord! How stupid and deaf she is!"Another pretext would be her snuff, which would seem too dry or too dampor not rubbed fine enough. After these fits of irritability her facewould grow yellow, and her maids knew by infallible symptoms when Belovawould again be deaf, the snuff damp, and the countess' face yellow. Justas she needed to work off her spleen so she had sometimes to exerciseher still-existing faculty of thinking--and the pretext for that was agame of patience. When she needed to cry, the deceased count would bethe pretext. When she wanted to be agitated, Nicholas and his healthwould be the pretext, and when she felt a need to speak spitefully, thepretext would be Countess Mary. When her vocal organs needed exercise,which was usually toward seven o'clock when she had had an after-dinnerrest in a darkened room, the pretext would be the retelling of the samestories over and over again to the same audience.The old lady's condition was understood by the whole household though noone ever spoke of it, and they all made every possible effort to satisfyher needs. Only by a rare glance exchanged with a sad smile betweenNicholas, Pierre, Natasha, and Countess Mary was the commonunderstanding of her condition expressed.But those glances expressed something more: they said that she hadplayed her part in life, that what they now saw was not her whole self,that we must all become like her, and that they were glad to yield toher, to restrain themselves for this once precious being formerly asfull of life as themselves, but now so much to be pitied. "Mementomori," said these glances.Only the really heartless, the stupid ones of that household, and thelittle children failed to understand this and avoided her.CHAPTER XIIIWhen Pierre and his wife entered the drawing room the countess was inone of her customary states in which she needed the mental exertion ofplaying patience, and so--though by force of habit she greeted him withthe words she always used when Pierre or her son returned after anabsence: "High time, my dear, high time! We were all weary of waitingfor you. Well, thank God!" and received her presents with anothercustomary remark: "It's not the gift that's precious, my dear, but thatyou give it to me, an old woman..."--yet it was evident that she was notpleased by Pierre's arrival at that moment when it diverted herattention from the unfinished game.She finished her game of patience and only then examined the presents.They consisted of a box for cards, of splendid workmanship, a bright-blue Sevres tea cup with shepherdesses depicted on it and with a lid,and a gold snuffbox with the count's portrait on the lid which Pierrehad had done by a miniaturist in Petersburg. The countess had longwished for such a box, but as she did not want to cry just then sheglanced indifferently at the portrait and gave her attention chiefly tothe box for cards."Thank you, my dear, you have cheered me up," said she as she alwaysdid. "But best of all you have brought yourself back--for I never sawanything like it, you ought to give your wife a scolding! What are we todo with her? She is like a mad woman when you are away. Doesn't seeanything, doesn't remember anything," she went on, repeating her usualphrases. "Look, Anna Timofeevna," she added to her companion, "see whata box for cards my son has brought us!"Belova admired the presents and was delighted with her dress material.Though Pierre, Natasha, Nicholas, Countess Mary, and Denisov had much totalk about that they could not discuss before the old countess--not thatanything was hidden from her, but because she had dropped so farbehindhand in many things that had they begun to converse in herpresence they would have had to answer inopportune questions and torepeat what they had already told her many times: that so-and-so wasdead and so-and-so was married, which she would again be unable toremember--yet they sat at tea round the samovar in the drawing room fromhabit, and Pierre answered the countess' questions as to whether PrinceVasili had aged and whether Countess Mary Alexeevna had sent greetingsand still thought of them, and other matters that interested no one andto which she herself was indifferent.Conversation of this kind, interesting to no one yet unavoidable,continued all through teatime. All the grown-up members of the familywere assembled near the round tea table at which Sonya presided besidethe samovar. The children with their tutors and governesses had had teaand their voices were audible from the next room. At tea all sat intheir accustomed places: Nicholas beside the stove at a small tablewhere his tea was handed to him; Milka, the old gray borzoi bitch(daughter of the first Milka), with a quite gray face and large blackeyes that seemed more prominent than ever, lay on the armchair besidehim; Denisov, whose curly hair, mustache, and whiskers had turned halfgray, sat beside countess Mary with his general's tunic unbuttoned;Pierre sat between his wife and the old countess. He spoke of what heknew might interest the old lady and that she could understand. He toldher of external social events and of the people who had formed thecircle of her contemporaries and had once been a real, living, anddistinct group, but who were now for the most part scattered about theworld and like herself were garnering the last ears of the harvests theyhad sown in earlier years. But to the old countess those contemporariesof hers seemed to be the only serious and real society. Natasha saw byPierre's animation that his visit had been interesting and that he hadmuch to tell them but dare not say it before the old countess. Denisov,not being a member of the family, did not understand Pierre's cautionand being, as a malcontent, much interested in what was occurring inPetersburg, kept urging Pierre to tell them about what had happened inthe Semenovsk regiment, then about Arakcheev, and then about the BibleSociety. Once or twice Pierre was carried away and began to speak ofthese things, but Nicholas and Natasha always brought him back to thehealth of Prince Ivan and Countess Mary Alexeevna."Well, and all this idiocy--Gossner and Tatawinova?" Denisov asked. "Isthat weally still going on?""Going on?" Pierre exclaimed. "Why more than ever! The Bible Society isthe whole government now!""What is that, mon cher ami?" asked the countess, who had finished hertea and evidently needed a pretext for being angry after her meal. "Whatare you saying about the government? I don't understand.""Well, you know, Maman," Nicholas interposed, knowing how to translatethings into his mother's language, "Prince Alexander Golitsyn hasfounded a society and in consequence has great influence, they say.""Arakcheev and Golitsyn," incautiously remarked Pierre, "are now thewhole government! And what a government! They see treason everywhere andare afraid of everything.""Well, and how is Prince Alexander to blame? He is a most estimable man.I used to meet him at Mary Antonovna's," said the countess in anoffended tone; and still more offended that they all remained silent,she went on: "Nowadays everyone finds fault. A Gospel Society! Well, andwhat harm is there in that?" and she rose (everybody else got up too)and with a severe expression sailed back to her table in the sittingroom.The melancholy silence that followed was broken by the sounds of thechildren's voices and laughter from the next room. Evidently some jollyexcitement was going on there."Finished, finished!" little Natasha's gleeful yell rose above them all.Pierre exchanged glances with Countess Mary and Nicholas (Natasha henever lost sight of) and smiled happily."That's delightful music!" said he."It means that Anna Makarovna has finished her stocking," said CountessMary."Oh, I'll go and see," said Pierre, jumping up. "You know," he added,stopping at the door, "why I'm especially fond of that music? It isalways the first thing that tells me all is well. When I was drivinghere today, the nearer I got to the house the more anxious I grew. As Ientered the anteroom I heard Andrusha's peals of laughter and that meantthat all was well.""I know! I know that feeling," said Nicholas. "But I mustn't go there--those stockings are to be a surprise for me."Pierre went to the children, and the shouting and laughter grew stilllouder."Come, Anna Makarovna," Pierre's voice was heard saying, "come here intothe middle of the room and at the word of command, 'One, two,' and whenI say 'three'... You stand here, and you in my arms--well now! One,two!..." said Pierre, and a silence followed: "three!" and a rapturouslybreathless cry of children's voices filled the room. "Two, two!" theyshouted.This meant two stockings, which by a secret process known only toherself Anna Makarovna used to knit at the same time on the sameneedles, and which, when they were ready, she always triumphantly drew,one out of the other, in the children's presence.CHAPTER XIVSoon after this the children came in to say good night. They kissedeveryone, the tutors and governesses made their bows, and they went out.Only young Nicholas and his tutor remained. Dessalles whispered to theboy to come downstairs."No, Monsieur Dessalles, I will ask my aunt to let me stay," repliedNicholas Bolkonski also in a whisper."Ma tante, please let me stay," said he, going up to his aunt.His face expressed entreaty, agitation, and ecstasy. Countess Maryglanced at him and turned to Pierre."When you are here he can't tear himself away," she said."I will bring him to you directly, Monsieur Dessalles. Good night!" saidPierre, giving his hand to the Swiss tutor, and he turned to youngNicholas with a smile. "You and I haven't seen anything of one anotheryet... How like he is growing, Mary!" he added, addressing CountessMary."Like my father?" asked the boy, flushing crimson and looking up atPierre with bright, ecstatic eyes.Pierre nodded, and went on with what he had been saying when thechildren had interrupted. Countess Mary sat down doing woolwork; Natashadid not take her eyes off her husband. Nicholas and Denisov rose, askedfor their pipes, smoked, went to fetch more tea from Sonya--who satweary but resolute at the samovar--and questioned Pierre. The curly-headed, delicate boy sat with shining eyes unnoticed in a corner,starting every now and then and muttering something to himself, andevidently experiencing a new and powerful emotion as he turned his curlyhead, with his thin neck exposed by his turn-down collar, toward theplace where Pierre sat.The conversation turned on the contemporary gossip about those in power,in which most people see the chief interest of home politics. Denisov,dissatisfied with the government on account of his own disappointmentsin the service, heard with pleasure of the things done in Petersburgwhich seemed to him stupid, and made forcible and sharp comments on whatPierre told them."One used to have to be a German--now one must dance with Tatawinova andMadame Kwudener, and wead Ecka'tshausen and the bwethwen. Oh, theyshould let that fine fellow Bonaparte loose--he'd knock all thisnonsense out of them! Fancy giving the command of the Semenov wegimentto a fellow like that Schwa'tz!" he cried.Nicholas, though free from Denisov's readiness to find fault witheverything, also thought that discussion of the government was a veryserious and weighty matter, and the fact that A had been appointedMinister of This and B Governor General of That, and that the Emperorhad said so-and-so and this minister so-and-so, seemed to him veryimportant. And so he thought it necessary to take an interest in thesethings and to question Pierre. The questions put by these two kept theconversation from changing its ordinary character of gossip about thehigher government circles.But Natasha, knowing all her husband's ways and ideas, saw that he hadlong been wishing but had been unable to divert the conversation toanother channel and express his own deeply felt idea for the sake ofwhich he had gone to Petersburg to consult with his new friend PrinceTheodore, and she helped him by asking how his affairs with PrinceTheodore had gone."What was it about?" asked Nicholas."Always the same thing," said Pierre, looking round at his listeners."Everybody sees that things are going so badly that they cannot beallowed to go on so and that it is the duty of all decent men tocounteract it as far as they can.""What can decent men do?" Nicholas inquired, frowning slightly. "Whatcan be done?""Why, this...""Come into my study," said Nicholas.Natasha, who had long expected to be fetched to nurse her baby, nowheard the nurse calling her and went to the nursery. Countess Maryfollowed her. The men went into the study and little Nicholas Bolkonskifollowed them unnoticed by his uncle and sat down at the writing tablein a shady corner by the window."Well, what would you do?" asked Denisov."Always some fantastic schemes," said Nicholas."Why this," began Pierre, not sitting down but pacing the room,sometimes stopping short, gesticulating, and lisping: "the position inPetersburg is this: the Emperor does not look into anything. He hasabandoned himself altogether to this mysticism" (Pierre could nottolerate mysticism in anyone now). "He seeks only for peace, and onlythese people sans foi ni loi * can give it him--people who recklesslyhack at and strangle everything--Magnitski, Arakcheev, and tuttiquanti.... You will agree that if you did not look after your estatesyourself but only wanted a quiet life, the harsher your steward was themore readily your object might be attained," he said to Nicholas.* Without faith or law."Well, what does that lead up to?" said Nicholas."Well, everything is going to ruin! Robbery in the law courts, in thearmy nothing but flogging, drilling, and Military Settlements; thepeople are tortured, enlightenment is suppressed. All that is young andhonest is crushed! Everyone sees that this cannot go on. Everything isstrained to such a degree that it will certainly break," said Pierre (asthose who examine the actions of any government have always said sincegovernments began). "I told them just one thing in Petersburg.""Told whom?""Well, you know whom," said Pierre, with a meaning glance from under hisbrows. "Prince Theodore and all those. To encourage culture andphilanthropy is all very well of course. The aim is excellent but in thepresent circumstances something else is needed."At that moment Nicholas noticed the presence of his nephew. His facedarkened and he went up to the boy."Why are you here?""Why? Let him be," said Pierre, taking Nicholas by the arm andcontinuing. "That is not enough, I told them. Something else is needed.When you stand expecting the overstrained string to snap at any moment,when everyone is expecting the inevitable catastrophe, as many aspossible must join hands as closely as they can to withstand the generalcalamity. Everything that is young and strong is being enticed away anddepraved. One is lured by women, another by honors, a third by ambitionor money, and they go over to that camp. No independent men, such as youor I, are left. What I say is widen the scope of our society, let themot d'ordre be not virtue alone but independence and action as well!"Nicholas, who had left his nephew, irritably pushed up an armchair, satdown in it, and listened to Pierre, coughing discontentedly and frowningmore and more."But action with what aim?" he cried. "And what position will you adopttoward the government?""Why, the position of assistants. The society need not be secret if thegovernment allows it. Not merely is it not hostile to government, but itis a society of true conservatives--a society of gentlemen in the fullmeaning of that word. It is only to prevent some Pugachev or other fromkilling my children and yours, and Arakcheev from sending me off to someMilitary Settlement. We join hands only for the public welfare and thegeneral safety.""Yes, but it's a secret society and therefore a hostile and harmful onewhich can only cause harm.""Why? Did the Tugendbund which saved Europe" (they did not then ventureto suggest that Russia had saved Europe) "do any harm? The Tugendbund isan alliance of virtue: it is love, mutual help... it is what Christpreached on the Cross."Natasha, who had come in during the conversation, looked joyfully at herhusband. It was not what he was saying that pleased her--that did noteven interest her, for it seemed to her that was all extremely simpleand that she had known it a long time (it seemed so to her because sheknew that it sprang from Pierre's whole soul), but it was his animatedand enthusiastic appearance that made her glad.The boy with the thin neck stretching out from the turn-down collar--whom everyone had forgotten--gazed at Pierre with even greater and morerapturous joy. Every word of Pierre's burned into his heart, and with anervous movement of his fingers he unconsciously broke the sealing waxand quill pens his hands came upon on his uncle's table."It is not at all what you suppose; but that is what the GermanTugendbund was, and what I am proposing.""No, my fwiend! The Tugendbund is all vewy well for the sausage eaters,but I don't understand it and can't even pwonounce it," interposedDenisov in a loud and resolute voice. "I agwee that evewything here iswotten and howwible, but the Tugendbund I don't understand. If we're notsatisfied, let us have a bunt of our own. That's all wight. Je suisvot'e homme!" ** "I'm your man."Pierre smiled, Natasha began to laugh, but Nicholas knitted his browsstill more and began proving to Pierre that there was no prospect of anygreat change and that all the danger he spoke of existed only in hisimagination. Pierre maintained the contrary, and as his mental facultieswere greater and more resourceful, Nicholas felt himself cornered. Thismade him still angrier, for he was fully convinced, not by reasoning butby something within him stronger than reason, of the justice of hisopinion."I will tell you this," he said, rising and trying with nervouslytwitching fingers to prop up his pipe in a corner, but finallyabandoning the attempt. "I can't prove it to you. You say thateverything here is rotten and that an overthrow is coming: I don't seeit. But you also say that our oath of allegiance is a conditionalmatter, and to that I reply: 'You are my best friend, as you know, butif you formed a secret society and began working against the government--be it what it may--I know it is my duty to obey the government. And ifArakcheev ordered me to lead a squadron against you and cut you down, Ishould not hesitate an instant, but should do it.' And you may argueabout that as you like!"An awkward silence followed these words. Natasha was the first to speak,defending her husband and attacking her brother. Her defense was weakand inapt but she attained her object. The conversation was resumed, andno longer in the unpleasantly hostile tone of Nicholas' last remark.When they all got up to go in to supper, little Nicholas Bolkonski wentup to Pierre, pale and with shining, radiant eyes."Uncle Pierre, you... no... If Papa were alive... would he agree withyou?" he asked.And Pierre suddenly realized what a special, independent, complex, andpowerful process of thought and feeling must have been going on in thisboy during that conversation, and remembering all he had said heregretted that the lad should have heard him. He had, however, to givehim an answer."Yes, I think so," he said reluctantly, and left the study.The lad looked down and seemed now for the first time to notice what hehad done to the things on the table. He flushed and went up to Nicholas."Uncle, forgive me, I did that... unintentionally," he said, pointing tothe broken sealing wax and pens.Nicholas started angrily."All right, all right," he said, throwing the bits under the table.And evidently suppressing his vexation with difficulty, he turned awayfrom the boy."You ought not to have been here at all," he said.CHAPTER XVThe conversation at supper was not about politics or societies, butturned on the subject Nicholas liked best--recollections of 1812.Denisov started these and Pierre was particularly agreeable and amusingabout them. The family separated on the most friendly terms.After supper Nicholas, having undressed in his study and giveninstructions to the steward who had been waiting for him, went to thebedroom in his dressing gown, where he found his wife still at hertable, writing."What are you writing, Mary?" Nicholas asked.Countess Mary blushed. She was afraid that what she was writing wouldnot be understood or approved by her husband.She had wanted to conceal what she was writing from him, but at the sametime was glad he had surprised her at it and that she would now have totell him."A diary, Nicholas," she replied, handing him a blue exercise bookfilled with her firm, bold writing."A diary?" Nicholas repeated with a shade of irony, and he took up thebook.It was in French.December 4. Today when Andrusha (her eldest boy) woke up he did not wishto dress and Mademoiselle Louise sent for me. He was naughty andobstinate. I tried threats, but he only grew angrier. Then I took thematter in hand: I left him alone and began with nurse's help to get theother children up, telling him that I did not love him. For a long timehe was silent, as if astonished, then he jumped out of bed, ran to me inhis shirt, and sobbed so that I could not calm him for a long time. Itwas plain that what troubled him most was that he had grieved me.Afterwards in the evening when I gave him his ticket, he again begancrying piteously and kissing me. One can do anything with him bytenderness."What is a 'ticket'?" Nicholas inquired."I have begun giving the elder ones marks every evening, showing howthey have behaved."Nicholas looked into the radiant eyes that were gazing at him, andcontinued to turn over the pages and read. In the diary was set downeverything in the children's lives that seemed noteworthy to theirmother as showing their characters or suggesting general reflections oneducational methods. They were for the most part quite insignificanttrifles, but did not seem so to the mother or to the father either, nowthat he read this diary about his children for the first time.Under the date "5" was entered:Mitya was naughty at table. Papa said he was to have no pudding. He hadnone, but looked so unhappily and greedily at the others while they wereeating! I think that punishment by depriving children of sweets onlydevelops their greediness. Must tell Nicholas this.Nicholas put down the book and looked at his wife. The radiant eyesgazed at him questioningly: would he approve or disapprove of her diary?There could be no doubt not only of his approval but also of hisadmiration for his wife.Perhaps it need not be done so pedantically, thought Nicholas, or evendone at all, but this untiring, continual spiritual effort of which thesole aim was the children's moral welfare delighted him. Had Nicholasbeen able to analyze his feelings he would have found that his steady,tender, and proud love of his wife rested on his feeling of wonder ather spirituality and at the lofty moral world, almost beyond his reach,in which she had her being.He was proud of her intelligence and goodness, recognized his owninsignificance beside her in the spiritual world, and rejoiced all themore that she with such a soul not only belonged to him but was part ofhimself."I quite, quite approve, my dearest!" said he with a significant look,and after a short pause he added: "And I behaved badly today. Youweren't in the study. We began disputing--Pierre and I--and I lost mytemper. But he is impossible: such a child! I don't know what wouldbecome of him if Natasha didn't keep him in hand.... Have you any ideawhy he went to Petersburg? They have formed...""Yes, I know," said Countess Mary. "Natasha told me.""Well, then, you know," Nicholas went on, growing hot at the mererecollection of their discussion, "he wanted to convince me that it isevery honest man's duty to go against the government, and that the oathof allegiance and duty... I am sorry you weren't there. They all fell onme--Denisov and Natasha... Natasha is absurd. How she rules over him!And yet there need only be a discussion and she has no words of her ownbut only repeats his sayings..." added Nicholas, yielding to thatirresistible inclination which tempts us to judge those nearest anddearest to us. He forgot that what he was saying about Natasha couldhave been applied word for word to himself in relation to his wife."Yes, I have noticed that," said Countess Mary."When I told him that duty and the oath were above everything, hestarted proving goodness knows what! A pity you were not there--whatwould you have said?""As I see it you were quite right, and I told Natasha so. Pierre sayseverybody is suffering, tortured, and being corrupted, and that it isour duty to help our neighbor. Of course he is right there," saidCountess Mary, "but he forgets that we have other duties nearer to us,duties indicated to us by God Himself, and that though we might exposeourselves to risks we must not risk our children.""Yes, that's it! That's just what I said to him," put in Nicholas, whofancied he really had said it. "But they insisted on their own view:love of one's neighbor and Christianity--and all this in the presence ofyoung Nicholas, who had gone into my study and broke all my things.""Ah, Nicholas, do you know I am often troubled about little Nicholas,"said Countess Mary. "He is such an exceptional boy. I am afraid Ineglect him in favor of my own: we all have children and relations whilehe has no one. He is constantly alone with his thoughts.""Well, I don't think you need reproach yourself on his account. All thatthe fondest mother could do for her son you have done and are doing forhim, and of course I am glad of it. He is a fine lad, a fine lad! Thisevening he listened to Pierre in a sort of trance, and fancy--as we weregoing in to supper I looked and he had broken everything on my table tobits, and he told me of it himself at once! I never knew him to tell anuntruth. A fine lad, a fine lad!" repeated Nicholas, who at heart wasnot fond of Nicholas Bolkonski but was always anxious to recognize thathe was a fine lad."Still, I am not the same as his own mother," said Countess Mary. "Ifeel I am not the same and it troubles me. A wonderful boy, but I amdreadfully afraid for him. It would be good for him to have companions.""Well it won't be for long. Next summer I'll take him to Petersburg,"said Nicholas. "Yes, Pierre always was a dreamer and always will be," hecontinued, returning to the talk in the study which had evidentlydisturbed him. "Well, what business is it of mine what goes on there--whether Arakcheev is bad, and all that? What business was it of minewhen I married and was so deep in debt that I was threatened withprison, and had a mother who could not see or understand it? And thenthere are you and the children and our affairs. Is it for my ownpleasure that I am at the farm or in the office from morning to night?No, but I know I must work to comfort my mother, to repay you, and notto leave the children such beggars as I was."Countess Mary wanted to tell him that man does not live by bread aloneand that he attached too much importance to these matters. But she knewshe must not say this and that it would be useless to do so. She onlytook his hand and kissed it. He took this as a sign of approval and aconfirmation of his thoughts, and after a few minutes' reflectioncontinued to think aloud."You know, Mary, today Elias Mitrofanych" (this was his overseer) "cameback from the Tambov estate and told me they are already offering eightythousand rubles for the forest."And with an eager face Nicholas began to speak of the possibility ofrepurchasing Otradnoe before long, and added: "Another ten years of lifeand I shall leave the children... in an excellent position."Countess Mary listened to her husband and understood all that he toldher. She knew that when he thought aloud in this way he would sometimesask her what he had been saying, and be vexed if he noticed that she hadbeen thinking about something else. But she had to force herself toattend, for what he was saying did not interest her at all. She lookedat him and did not think, but felt, about something different. She felta submissive tender love for this man who would never understand allthat she understood, and this seemed to make her love for him stillstronger and added a touch of passionate tenderness. Besides thisfeeling which absorbed her altogether and hindered her from followingthe details of her husband's plans, thoughts that had no connection withwhat he was saying flitted through her mind. She thought of her nephew.Her husband's account of the boy's agitation while Pierre was speakingstruck her forcibly, and various traits of his gentle, sensitivecharacter recurred to her mind; and while thinking of her nephew shethought also of her own children. She did not compare them with him, butcompared her feeling for them with her feeling for him, and felt withregret that there was something lacking in her feeling for youngNicholas.Sometimes it seemed to her that this difference arose from thedifference in their ages, but she felt herself to blame toward him andpromised in her heart to do better and to accomplish the impossible--inthis life to love her husband, her children, little Nicholas, and allher neighbors, as Christ loved mankind. Countess Mary's soul alwaysstrove toward the infinite, the eternal, and the absolute, and couldtherefore never be at peace. A stern expression of the lofty, secretsuffering of a soul burdened by the body appeared on her face. Nicholasgazed at her. "O God! What will become of us if she dies, as I alwaysfear when her face is like that?" thought he, and placing himself beforethe icon he began to say his evening prayers.CHAPTER XVINatasha and Pierre, left alone, also began to talk as only a husband andwife can talk, that is, with extraordinary clearness and rapidity,understanding and expressing each other's thoughts in ways contrary toall rules of logic, without premises, deductions, or conclusions, and ina quite peculiar way. Natasha was so used to this kind of talk with herhusband that for her it was the surest sign of something being wrongbetween them if Pierre followed a line of logical reasoning. When hebegan proving anything, or talking argumentatively and calmly and she,led on by his example, began to do the same, she knew that they were onthe verge of a quarrel.From the moment they were alone and Natasha came up to him with wide-open happy eyes, and quickly seizing his head pressed it to her bosom,saying: "Now you are all mine, mine! You won't escape!"--from thatmoment this conversation began, contrary to all the laws of logic andcontrary to them because quite different subjects were talked about atone and the same time. This simultaneous discussion of many topics didnot prevent a clear understanding but on the contrary was the surestsign that they fully understood one another.Just as in a dream when all is uncertain, unreasoning, andcontradictory, except the feeling that guides the dream, so in thisintercourse contrary to all laws of reason, the words themselves werenot consecutive and clear but only the feeling that prompted them.Natasha spoke to Pierre about her brother's life and doings, of how shehad suffered and lacked life during his own absence, and of how she wasfonder than ever of Mary, and how Mary was in every way better thanherself. In saying this Natasha was sincere in acknowledging Mary'ssuperiority, but at the same time by saying it she made a demand onPierre that he should, all the same, prefer her to Mary and to all otherwomen, and that now, especially after having seen many women inPetersburg, he should tell her so afresh.Pierre, answering Natasha's words, told her how intolerable it had beenfor him to meet ladies at dinners and balls in Petersburg."I have quite lost the knack of talking to ladies," he said. "It wassimply dull. Besides, I was very busy."Natasha looked intently at him and went on:"Mary is so splendid," she said. "How she understands children! It is asif she saw straight into their souls. Yesterday, for instance, Mitya wasnaughty...""How like his father he is," Pierre interjected.Natasha knew why he mentioned Mitya's likeness to Nicholas: therecollection of his dispute with his brother-in-law was unpleasant andhe wanted to know what Natasha thought of it."Nicholas has the weakness of never agreeing with anything not generallyaccepted. But I understand that you value what opens up a fresh line,"said she, repeating words Pierre had once uttered."No, the chief point is that to Nicholas ideas and discussions are anamusement--almost a pastime," said Pierre. "For instance, he iscollecting a library and has made it a rule not to buy a new book tillhe has read what he had already bought--Sismondi and Rousseau andMontesquieu," he added with a smile. "You know how much I..." he beganto soften down what he had said; but Natasha interrupted him to showthat this was unnecessary."So you say ideas are an amusement to him....""Yes, and for me nothing else is serious. All the time in Petersburg Isaw everyone as in a dream. When I am taken up by a thought, all else ismere amusement.""Ah, I'm so sorry I wasn't there when you met the children," saidNatasha. "Which was most delighted? Lisa, I'm sure.""Yes," Pierre replied, and went on with what was in his mind. "Nicholassays we ought not to think. But I can't help it. Besides, when I was inPetersburg I felt (I can say this to you) that the whole affair would goto pieces without me--everyone was pulling his own way. But I succeededin uniting them all; and then my idea is so clear and simple. You see, Idon't say that we ought to oppose this and that. We may be mistaken.What I say is: 'Join hands, you who love the right, and let there be butone banner--that of active virtue.' Prince Sergey is a fine fellow andclever."Natasha would have had no doubt as to the greatness of Pierre's idea,but one thing disconcerted her. "Can a man so important and necessary tosociety be also my husband? How did this happen?" She wished to expressthis doubt to him. "Now who could decide whether he is really clevererthan all the others?" she asked herself, and passed in review all thosewhom Pierre most respected. Judging by what he had said there was no onehe had respected so highly as Platon Karataev."Do you know what I am thinking about?" she asked. "About PlatonKarataev. Would he have approved of you now, do you think?"Pierre was not at all surprised at this question. He understood hiswife's line of thought."Platon Karataev?" he repeated, and pondered, evidently sincerely tryingto imagine Karataev's opinion on the subject. "He would not haveunderstood... yet perhaps he would.""I love you awfully!" Natasha suddenly said. "Awfully, awfully!""No, he would not have approved," said Pierre, after reflection. "Whathe would have approved of is our family life. He was always so anxiousto find seemliness, happiness, and peace in everything, and I shouldhave been proud to let him see us. There now--you talk of my absence,but you wouldn't believe what a special feeling I have for you after aseparation....""Yes, I should think..." Natasha began."No, it's not that. I never leave off loving you. And one couldn't lovemore, but this is something special.... Yes, of course-" he did notfinish because their eyes meeting said the rest."What nonsense it is," Natasha suddenly exclaimed, "about honeymoons,and that the greatest happiness is at first! On the contrary, now is thebest of all. If only you did not go away! Do you remember how wequarreled? And it was always my fault. Always mine. And what wequarreled about--I don't even remember!""Always about the same thing," said Pierre with a smile. "Jealo...""Don't say it! I can't bear it!" Natasha cried, and her eyes glitteredcoldly and vindictively. "Did you see her?" she added, after a pause."No, and if I had I shouldn't have recognized her."They were silent for a while."Oh, do you know? While you were talking in the study I was looking atyou," Natasha began, evidently anxious to disperse the cloud that hadcome over them. "You are as like him as two peas--like the boy." (Shemeant her little son.) "Oh, it's time to go to him.... The milk'scome.... But I'm sorry to leave you."They were silent for a few seconds. Then suddenly turning to one anotherat the same time they both began to speak. Pierre began with self-satisfaction and enthusiasm, Natasha with a quiet, happy smile. Havinginterrupted one another they both stopped to let the other continue."No. What did you say? Go on, go on.""No, you go on, I was talking nonsense," said Natasha.Pierre finished what he had begun. It was the sequel to his complacentreflections on his success in Petersburg. At that moment it seemed tohim that he was chosen to give a new direction to the whole of Russiansociety and to the whole world."I only wished to say that ideas that have great results are alwayssimple ones. My whole idea is that if vicious people are united andconstitute a power, then honest folk must do the same. Now that's simpleenough.""Yes.""And what were you going to say?""I? Only nonsense.""But all the same?""Oh nothing, only a trifle," said Natasha, smilingly still morebrightly. "I only wanted to tell you about Petya: today nurse was comingto take him from me, and he laughed, shut his eyes, and clung to me. I'msure he thought he was hiding. Awfully sweet! There, now he's crying.Well, good-by!" and she left the room.Meanwhile downstairs in young Nicholas Bolkonski's bedroom a little lampwas burning as usual. (The boy was afraid of the dark and they could notcure him of it.) Dessalles slept propped up on four pillows and hisRoman nose emitted sounds of rhythmic snoring. Little Nicholas, who hadjust waked up in a cold perspiration, sat up in bed and gazed before himwith wide-open eyes. He had awaked from a terrible dream. He had dreamedthat he and Uncle Pierre, wearing helmets such as were depicted in hisPlutarch, were leading a huge army. The army was made up of whiteslanting lines that filled the air like the cobwebs that float about inautumn and which Dessalles called les fils de la Vierge. In front wasGlory, which was similar to those threads but rather thicker. He andPierre were borne along lightly and joyously, nearer and nearer to theirgoal. Suddenly the threads that moved them began to slacken and becomeentangled and it grew difficult to move. And Uncle Nicholas stood beforethem in a stern and threatening attitude."Have you done this?" he said, pointing to some broken sealing wax andpens. "I loved you, but I have orders from Arakcheev and will kill thefirst of you who moves forward." Little Nicholas turned to look atPierre but Pierre was no longer there. In his place was his father--Prince Andrew--and his father had neither shape nor form, but heexisted, and when little Nicholas perceived him he grew faint with love:he felt himself powerless, limp, and formless. His father caressed andpitied him. But Uncle Nicholas came nearer and nearer to them. Terrorseized young Nicholas and he awoke."My father!" he thought. (Though there were two good portraits of PrinceAndrew in the house, Nicholas never imagined him in human form.) "Myfather has been with me and caressed me. He approved of me and of UnclePierre. Whatever he may tell me, I will do it. Mucius Scaevola burnedhis hand. Why should not the same sort of thing happen to me? I knowthey want me to learn. And I will learn. But someday I shall havefinished learning, and then I will do something. I only pray God thatsomething may happen to me such as happened to Plutarch's men, and Iwill act as they did. I will do better. Everyone shall know me, love me,and be delighted with me!" And suddenly his bosom heaved with sobs andhe began to cry."Are you ill?" he heard Dessalles' voice asking."No," answered Nicholas, and lay back on his pillow."He is good and kind and I am fond of him!" he thought of Dessalles."But Uncle Pierre! Oh, what a wonderful man he is! And my father? Oh,Father, Father! Yes, I will do something with which even he would besatisfied...."SECOND EPILOGUECHAPTER IHistory is the life of nations and of humanity. To seize and put intowords, to describe directly the life of humanity or even of a singlenation, appears impossible.The ancient historians all employed one and the same method to describeand seize the apparently elusive--the life of a people. They describedthe activity of individuals who ruled the people, and regarded theactivity of those men as representing the activity of the whole nation.The question: how did individuals make nations act as they wished and bywhat was the will of these individuals themselves guided? the ancientsmet by recognizing a divinity which subjected the nations to the will ofa chosen man, and guided the will of that chosen man so as to accomplishends that were predestined.For the ancients these questions were solved by a belief in the directparticipation of the Deity in human affairs.Modern history, in theory, rejects both these principles.It would seem that having rejected the belief of the ancients in man'ssubjection to the Deity and in a predetermined aim toward which nationsare led, modern history should study not the manifestations of power butthe causes that produce it. But modern history has not done this. Havingin theory rejected the view held by the ancients, it still follows themin practice.Instead of men endowed with divine authority and directly guided by thewill of God, modern history has given us either heroes endowed withextraordinary, superhuman capacities, or simply men of very variouskinds, from monarchs to journalists, who lead the masses. Instead of theformer divinely appointed aims of the Jewish, Greek, or Roman nations,which ancient historians regarded as representing the progress ofhumanity, modern history has postulated its own aims--the welfare of theFrench, German, or English people, or, in its highest abstraction, thewelfare and civilization of humanity in general, by which is usuallymeant that of the peoples occupying a small northwesterly portion of alarge continent.Modern history has rejected the beliefs of the ancients withoutreplacing them by a new conception, and the logic of the situation hasobliged the historians, after they had apparently rejected the divineauthority of the kings and the "fate" of the ancients, to reach the sameconclusion by another road, that is, to recognize (1) nations guided byindividual men, and (2) the existence of a known aim to which thesenations and humanity at large are tending.At the basis of the works of all the modern historians from Gibbon toBuckle, despite their seeming disagreements and the apparent novelty oftheir outlooks, lie those two old, unavoidable assumptions.In the first place the historian describes the activity of individualswho in his opinion have directed humanity (one historian considers onlymonarchs, generals, and ministers as being such men, while anotherincludes also orators, learned men, reformers, philosophers, and poets).Secondly, it is assumed that the goal toward which humanity is being ledis known to the historians: to one of them this goal is the greatness ofthe Roman, Spanish, or French realm; to another it is liberty, equality,and a certain kind of civilization of a small corner of the world calledEurope.In 1789 a ferment arises in Paris; it grows, spreads, and is expressedby a movement of peoples from west to east. Several times it moveseastward and collides with a countermovement from the east westward. In1812 it reaches its extreme limit, Moscow, and then, with remarkablesymmetry, a countermovement occurs from east to west, attracting to it,as the first movement had done, the nations of middle Europe. Thecounter movement reaches the starting point of the first movement in thewest--Paris--and subsides.During that twenty-year period an immense number of fields were leftuntilled, houses were burned, trade changed its direction, millions ofmen migrated, were impoverished, or were enriched, and millions ofChristian men professing the law of love of their fellows slew oneanother.What does all this mean? Why did it happen? What made those people burnhouses and slay their fellow men? What were the causes of these events?What force made men act so? These are the instinctive, plain, and mostlegitimate questions humanity asks itself when it encounters themonuments and tradition of that period.For a reply to these questions the common sense of mankind turns to thescience of history, whose aim is to enable nations and humanity to knowthemselves.If history had retained the conception of the ancients it would havesaid that God, to reward or punish his people, gave Napoleon power anddirected his will to the fulfillment of the divine ends, and that replywould have been clear and complete. One might believe or disbelieve inthe divine significance of Napoleon, but for anyone believing in itthere would have been nothing unintelligible in the history of thatperiod, nor would there have been any contradictions.But modern history cannot give that reply. Science does not admit theconception of the ancients as to the direct participation of the Deityin human affairs, and therefore history ought to give other answers.Modern history replying to these questions says: you want to know whatthis movement means, what caused it, and what force produced theseevents? Then listen:"Louis XIV was a very proud and self-confident man; he had such and suchmistresses and such and such ministers and he ruled France badly. Hisdescendants were weak men and they too ruled France badly. And they hadsuch and such favorites and such and such mistresses. Moreover, certainmen wrote some books at that time. At the end of the eighteenth centurythere were a couple of dozen men in Paris who began to talk about allmen being free and equal. This caused people all over France to begin toslash at and drown one another. They killed the king and many otherpeople. At that time there was in France a man of genius--Napoleon. Heconquered everybody everywhere--that is, he killed many people becausehe was a great genius. And for some reason he went to kill Africans, andkilled them so well and was so cunning and wise that when he returned toFrance he ordered everybody to obey him, and they all obeyed him. Havingbecome an Emperor he again went out to kill people in Italy, Austria,and Prussia. And there too he killed a great many. In Russia there wasan Emperor, Alexander, who decided to restore order in Europe andtherefore fought against Napoleon. In 1807 he suddenly made friends withhim, but in 1811 they again quarreled and again began killing manypeople. Napoleon led six hundred thousand men into Russia and capturedMoscow; then he suddenly ran away from Moscow, and the EmperorAlexander, helped by the advice of Stein and others, united Europe toarm against the disturber of its peace. All Napoleon's allies suddenlybecame his enemies and their forces advanced against the fresh forces heraised. The Allies defeated Napoleon, entered Paris, forced Napoleon toabdicate, and sent him to the island of Elba, not depriving him of thetitle of Emperor and showing him every respect, though five years beforeand one year later they all regarded him as an outlaw and a brigand.Then Louis XVIII, who till then had been the laughingstock both of theFrench and the Allies, began to reign. And Napoleon, shedding tearsbefore his Old Guards, renounced the throne and went into exile. Thenthe skillful statesmen and diplomatists (especially Talleyrand, whomanaged to sit down in a particular chair before anyone else and therebyextended the frontiers of France) talked in Vienna and by theseconversations made the nations happy or unhappy. Suddenly thediplomatists and monarchs nearly quarreled and were on the point ofagain ordering their armies to kill one another, but just then Napoleonarrived in France with a battalion, and the French, who had been hatinghim, immediately all submitted to him. But the Allied monarchs wereangry at this and went to fight the French once more. And they defeatedthe genius Napoleon and, suddenly recognizing him as a brigand, sent himto the island of St. Helena. And the exile, separated from the belovedFrance so dear to his heart, died a lingering death on that rock andbequeathed his great deeds to posterity. But in Europe a reactionoccurred and the sovereigns once again all began to oppress theirsubjects."It would be a mistake to think that this is ironic--a caricature of thehistorical accounts. On the contrary it is a very mild expression of thecontradictory replies, not meeting the questions, which all thehistorians give, from the compilers of memoirs and the histories ofseparate states to the writers of general histories and the newhistories of the culture of that period.The strangeness and absurdity of these replies arise from the fact thatmodern history, like a deaf man, answers questions no one has asked.If the purpose of history be to give a description of the movement ofhumanity and of the peoples, the first question--in the absence of areply to which all the rest will be incomprehensible--is: what is thepower that moves peoples? To this, modern history laboriously replieseither that Napoleon was a great genius, or that Louis XIV was veryproud, or that certain writers wrote certain books.All that may be so and mankind is ready to agree with it, but it is notwhat was asked. All that would be interesting if we recognized a divinepower based on itself and always consistently directing its nationsthrough Napoleons, Louis-es, and writers; but we do not acknowledge sucha power, and therefore before speaking about Napoleons, Louis-es, andauthors, we ought to be shown the connection existing between these menand the movement of the nations.If instead of a divine power some other force has appeared, it should beexplained in what this new force consists, for the whole interest ofhistory lies precisely in that force.History seems to assume that this force is self-evident and known toeveryone. But in spite of every desire to regard it as known, anyonereading many historical works cannot help doubting whether this newforce, so variously understood by the historians themselves, is reallyquite well known to everybody.CHAPTER IIWhat force moves the nations?Biographical historians and historians of separate nations understandthis force as a power inherent in heroes and rulers. In their narrationevents occur solely by the will of a Napoleon, and Alexander, or ingeneral of the persons they describe. The answers given by this kind ofhistorian to the question of what force causes events to happen aresatisfactory only as long as there is but one historian to each event.As soon as historians of different nationalities and tendencies begin todescribe the same event, the replies they give immediately lose allmeaning, for this force is understood by them all not only differentlybut often in quite contradictory ways. One historian says that an eventwas produced by Napoleon's power, another that it was produced byAlexander's, a third that it was due to the power of some other person.Besides this, historians of that kind contradict each other even intheir statement as to the force on which the authority of someparticular person was based. Thiers, a Bonapartist, says that Napoleon'spower was based on his virtue and genius. Lanfrey, a Republican, says itwas based on his trickery and deception of the people. So the historiansof this class, by mutually destroying one another's positions, destroythe understanding of the force which produces events, and furnish noreply to history's essential question.Writers of universal history who deal with all the nations seem torecognize how erroneous is the specialist historians' view of the forcewhich produces events. They do not recognize it as a power inherent inheroes and rulers, but as the resultant of a multiplicity of variouslydirected forces. In describing a war or the subjugation of a people, ageneral historian looks for the cause of the event not in the power ofone man, but in the interaction of many persons connected with theevent.According to this view the power of historical personages, representedas the product of many forces, can no longer, it would seem, be regardedas a force that itself produces events. Yet in most cases universalhistorians still employ the conception of power as a force that itselfproduces events, and treat it as their cause. In their exposition, anhistoric character is first the product of his time, and his power onlythe resultant of various forces, and then his power is itself a forceproducing events. Gervinus, Schlosser, and others, for instance, at onetime prove Napoleon to be a product of the Revolution, of the ideas of1789 and so forth, and at another plainly say that the campaign of 1812and other things they do not like were simply the product of Napoleon'smisdirected will, and that the very ideas of 1789 were arrested in theirdevelopment by Napoleon's caprice. The ideas of the Revolution and thegeneral temper of the age produced Napoleon's power. But Napoleon'spower suppressed the ideas of the Revolution and the general temper ofthe age.This curious contradiction is not accidental. Not only does it occur atevery step, but the universal historians' accounts are all made up of achain of such contradictions. This contradiction occurs because afterentering the field of analysis the universal historians stop halfway.To find component forces equal to the composite or resultant force, thesum of the components must equal the resultant. This condition is neverobserved by the universal historians, and so to explain the resultantforces they are obliged to admit, in addition to the insufficientcomponents, another unexplained force affecting the resultant action.Specialist historians describing the campaign of 1813 or the restorationof the Bourbons plainly assert that these events were produced by thewill of Alexander. But the universal historian Gervinus, refuting thisopinion of the specialist historian, tries to prove that the campaign of1813 and the restoration of the Bourbons were due to other things besideAlexander's will--such as the activity of Stein, Metternich, Madame deStael, Talleyrand, Fichte, Chateaubriand, and others. The historianevidently decomposes Alexander's power into the components: Talleyrand,Chateaubriand, and the rest--but the sum of the components, that is, theinteractions of Chateaubriand, Talleyrand, Madame de Stael, and theothers, evidently does not equal the resultant, namely the phenomenon ofmillions of Frenchmen submitting to the Bourbons. That Chateaubriand,Madame de Stael, and others spoke certain words to one another onlyaffected their mutual relations but does not account for the submissionof millions. And therefore to explain how from these relations of theirsthe submission of millions of people resulted--that is, how componentforces equal to one A gave a resultant equal to a thousand times A--thehistorian is again obliged to fall back on power--the force he haddenied--and to recognize it as the resultant of the forces, that is, hehas to admit an unexplained force acting on the resultant. And that isjust what the universal historians do, and consequently they not onlycontradict the specialist historians but contradict themselves.Peasants having no clear idea of the cause of rain, say, according towhether they want rain or fine weather: "The wind has blown the cloudsaway," or, "The wind has brought up the clouds." And in the same way theuniversal historians sometimes, when it pleases them and fits in withtheir theory, say that power is the result of events, and sometimes,when they want to prove something else, say that power produces events.A third class of historians--the so-called historians of culture--following the path laid down by the universal historians who sometimesaccept writers and ladies as forces producing events--again take thatforce to be something quite different. They see it in what is calledculture--in mental activity.The historians of culture are quite consistent in regard to theirprogenitors, the writers of universal histories, for if historicalevents may be explained by the fact that certain persons treated oneanother in such and such ways, why not explain them by the fact thatsuch and such people wrote such and such books? Of the immense number ofindications accompanying every vital phenomenon, these historians selectthe indication of intellectual activity and say that this indication isthe cause. But despite their endeavors to prove that the cause of eventslies in intellectual activity, only by a great stretch can one admitthat there is any connection between intellectual activity and themovement of peoples, and in no case can one admit that intellectualactivity controls people's actions, for that view is not confirmed bysuch facts as the very cruel murders of the French Revolution resultingfrom the doctrine of the equality of man, or the very cruel wars andexecutions resulting from the preaching of love.But even admitting as correct all the cunningly devised arguments withwhich these histories are filled--admitting that nations are governed bysome undefined force called an idea--history's essential question stillremains unanswered, and to the former power of monarchs and to theinfluence of advisers and other people introduced by the universalhistorians, another, newer force--the idea--is added, the connection ofwhich with the masses needs explanation. It is possible to understandthat Napoleon had power and so events occurred; with some effort one mayeven conceive that Napoleon together with other influences was the causeof an event; but how a book, Le Contrat Social, had the effect of makingFrenchmen begin to drown one another cannot be understood without anexplanation of the causal nexus of this new force with the event.Undoubtedly some relation exists between all who live contemporaneously,and so it is possible to find some connection between the intellectualactivity of men and their historical movements, just as such aconnection may be found between the movements of humanity and commerce,handicraft, gardening, or anything else you please. But why intellectualactivity is considered by the historians of culture to be the cause orexpression of the whole historical movement is hard to understand. Onlythe following considerations can have led the historians to such aconclusion: (1) that history is written by learned men, and so it isnatural and agreeable for them to think that the activity of their classsupplies the basis of the movement of all humanity, just as a similarbelief is natural and agreeable to traders, agriculturists, and soldiers(if they do not express it, that is merely because traders and soldiersdo not write history), and (2) that spiritual activity, enlightenment,civilization, culture, ideas, are all indistinct, indefinite conceptionsunder whose banner it is very easy to use words having a still lessdefinite meaning, and which can therefore be readily introduced into anytheory.But not to speak of the intrinsic quality of histories of this kind(which may possibly even be of use to someone for something) thehistories of culture, to which all general histories tend more and moreto approximate, are significant from the fact that after seriously andminutely examining various religious, philosophic, and politicaldoctrines as causes of events, as soon as they have to describe anactual historic event such as the campaign of 1812 for instance, theyinvoluntarily describe it as resulting from an exercise of power--andsay plainly that that was the result of Napoleon's will. Speaking so,the historians of culture involuntarily contradict themselves, and showthat the new force they have devised does not account for what happensin history, and that history can only be explained by introducing apower which they apparently do not recognize.CHAPTER IIIA locomotive is moving. Someone asks: "What moves it?" A peasant saysthe devil moves it. Another man says the locomotive moves because itswheels go round. A third asserts that the cause of its movement lies inthe smoke which the wind carries away.The peasant is irrefutable. He has devised a complete explanation. Torefute him someone would have to prove to him that there is no devil, oranother peasant would have to explain to him that it is not the devilbut a German, who moves the locomotive. Only then, as a result of thecontradiction, will they see that they are both wrong. But the man whosays that the movement of the wheels is the cause refutes himself, forhaving once begun to analyze he ought to go on and explain further whythe wheels go round; and till he has reached the ultimate cause of themovement of the locomotive in the pressure of steam in the boiler, hehas no right to stop in his search for the cause. The man who explainsthe movement of the locomotive by the smoke that is carried back hasnoticed that the wheels do not supply an explanation and has taken thefirst sign that occurs to him and in his turn has offered that as anexplanation.The only conception that can explain the movement of the locomotive isthat of a force commensurate with the movement observed.The only conception that can explain the movement of the peoples is thatof some force commensurate with the whole movement of the peoples.Yet to supply this conception various historians take forces ofdifferent kinds, all of which are incommensurate with the movementobserved. Some see it as a force directly inherent in heroes, as thepeasant sees the devil in the locomotive; others as a force resultingfrom several other forces, like the movement of the wheels; others againas an intellectual influence, like the smoke that is blown away.So long as histories are written of separate individuals, whetherCaesars, Alexanders, Luthers, or Voltaires, and not the histories ofall, absolutely all those who take part in an event, it is quiteimpossible to describe the movement of humanity without the conceptionof a force compelling men to direct their activity toward a certain end.And the only such conception known to historians is that of power.This conception is the one handle by means of which the material ofhistory, as at present expounded, can be dealt with, and anyone whobreaks that handle off, as Buckle did, without finding some other methodof treating historical material, merely deprives himself of the onepossible way of dealing with it. The necessity of the conception ofpower as an explanation of historical events is best demonstrated by theuniversal historians and historians of culture themselves, for theyprofessedly reject that conception but inevitably have recourse to it atevery step.In dealing with humanity's inquiry, the science of history up to now islike money in circulation--paper money and coin. The biographies andspecial national histories are like paper money. They can be used andcan circulate and fulfill their purpose without harm to anyone and evenadvantageously, as long as no one asks what is the security behind them.You need only forget to ask how the will of heroes produces events, andsuch histories as Thiers' will be interesting and instructive and mayperhaps even possess a tinge of poetry. But just as doubts of the realvalue of paper money arise either because, being easy to make, too muchof it gets made or because people try to exchange it for gold, so alsodoubts concerning the real value of such histories arise either becausetoo many of them are written or because in his simplicity of heartsomeone inquires: by what force did Napoleon do this?--that is, wants toexchange the current paper money for the real gold of actualcomprehension.The writers of universal histories and of the history of culture arelike people who, recognizing the defects of paper money, decide tosubstitute for it money made of metal that has not the specific gravityof gold. It may indeed make jingling coin, but will do no more thanthat. Paper money may deceive the ignorant, but nobody is deceived bytokens of base metal that have no value but merely jingle. As gold isgold only if it is serviceable not merely for exchange but also for use,so universal historians will be valuable only when they can reply tohistory's essential question: what is power? The universal historiansgive contradictory replies to that question, while the historians ofculture evade it and answer something quite different. And as countersof imitation gold can be used only among a group of people who agree toaccept them as gold, or among those who do not know the nature of gold,so universal historians and historians of culture, not answeringhumanity's essential question, serve as currency for some purposes oftheir own, only in universities and among the mass of readers who have ataste for what they call "serious reading."CHAPTER IVHaving abandoned the conception of the ancients as to the divinesubjection of the will of a nation to some chosen man and the subjectionof that man's will to the Deity, history cannot without contradictionstake a single step till it has chosen one of two things: either a returnto the former belief in the direct intervention of the Deity in humanaffairs or a definite explanation of the meaning of the force producinghistorical events and termed "power."A return to the first is impossible, the belief has been destroyed; andso it is essential to explain what is meant by power.Napoleon ordered an army to be raised and go to war. We are soaccustomed to that idea and have become so used to it that the question:why did six hundred thousand men go to fight when Napoleon utteredcertain words, seems to us senseless. He had the power and so what heordered was done.This reply is quite satisfactory if we believe that the power was givenhim by God. But as soon as we do not admit that, it becomes essential todetermine what is this power of one man over others.It cannot be the direct physical power of a strong man over a weak one--a domination based on the application or threat of physical force, likethe power of Hercules; nor can it be based on the effect of moral force,as in their simplicity some historians think who say that the leadingfigures in history are heroes, that is, men gifted with a specialstrength of soul and mind called genius. This power cannot be based onthe predominance of moral strength, for, not to mention heroes such asNapoleon about whose moral qualities opinions differ widely, historyshows us that neither a Louis XI nor a Metternich, who ruled overmillions of people, had any particular moral qualities, but on thecontrary were generally morally weaker than any of the millions theyruled over.If the source of power lies neither in the physical nor in the moralqualities of him who possesses it, it must evidently be looked forelsewhere--in the relation to the people of the man who wields thepower.And that is how power is understood by the science of jurisprudence,that exchange bank of history which offers to exchange history'sunderstanding of power for true gold.Power is the collective will of the people transferred, by expressed ortacit consent, to their chosen rulers.In the domain of jurisprudence, which consists of discussions of how astate and power might be arranged were it possible for all that to bearranged, it is all very clear; but when applied to history thatdefinition of power needs explanation.The science of jurisprudence regards the state and power as the ancientsregarded fire--namely, as something existing absolutely. But forhistory, the state and power are merely phenomena, just as for modernphysics fire is not an element but a phenomenon.From this fundamental difference between the view held by history andthat held by jurisprudence, it follows that jurisprudence can tellminutely how in its opinion power should be constituted and what power--existing immutably outside time--is, but to history's questions aboutthe meaning of the mutations of power in time it can answer nothing.If power be the collective will of the people transferred to theirruler, was Pugachev a representative of the will of the people? If not,then why was Napoleon I? Why was Napoleon III a criminal when he wastaken prisoner at Boulogne, and why, later on, were those criminals whomhe arrested?Do palace revolutions--in which sometimes only two or three people takepart--transfer the will of the people to a new ruler? In internationalrelations, is the will of the people also transferred to theirconqueror? Was the will of the Confederation of the Rhine transferred toNapoleon in 1806? Was the will of the Russian people transferred toNapoleon in 1809, when our army in alliance with the French went tofight the Austrians?To these questions three answers are possible:Either to assume (1) that the will of the people is alwaysunconditionally transferred to the ruler or rulers they have chosen, andthat therefore every emergence of a new power, every struggle againstthe power once appointed, should be absolutely regarded as aninfringement of the real power; or (2) that the will of the people istransferred to the rulers conditionally, under definite and knownconditions, and to show that all limitations, conflicts, and evendestructions of power result from a nonobservance by the rulers of theconditions under which their power was entrusted to them; or (3) thatthe will of the people is delegated to the rulers conditionally, butthat the conditions are unknown and indefinite, and that the appearanceof several authorities, their struggles and their falls, result solelyfrom the greater or lesser fulfillment by the rulers of these unknownconditions on which the will of the people is transferred from somepeople to others.And these are the three ways in which the historians do explain therelation of the people to their rulers.Some historians--those biographical and specialist historians alreadyreferred to--in their simplicity failing to understand the question ofthe meaning of power, seem to consider that the collective will of thepeople is unconditionally transferred to historical persons, andtherefore when describing some single state they assume that particularpower to be the one absolute and real power, and that any other forceopposing this is not a power but a violation of power--mere violence.Their theory, suitable for primitive and peaceful periods of history,has the inconvenience--in application to complex and stormy periods inthe life of nations during which various powers arise simultaneously andstruggle with one another--that a Legitimist historian will prove thatthe National Convention, the Directory, and Bonaparte were mereinfringers of the true power, while a Republican and a Bonapartist willprove: the one that the Convention and the other that the Empire was thereal power, and that all the others were violations of power. Evidentlythe explanations furnished by these historians being mutuallycontradictory can only satisfy young children.Recognizing the falsity of this view of history, another set ofhistorians say that power rests on a conditional delegation of the willof the people to their rulers, and that historical leaders have poweronly conditionally on carrying out the program that the will of thepeople has by tacit agreement prescribed to them. But what this programconsists in these historians do not say, or if they do they continuallycontradict one another.Each historian, according to his view of what constitutes a nation'sprogress, looks for these conditions in the greatness, wealth, freedom,or enlightenment of citizens of France or some other country. But not tomention the historians' contradictions as to the nature of this program--or even admitting that some one general program of these conditionsexists--the facts of history almost always contradict that theory. Ifthe conditions under which power is entrusted consist in the wealth,freedom, and enlightenment of the people, how is it that Louis XIV andIvan the Terrible end their reigns tranquilly, while Louis XVI andCharles I are executed by their people? To this question historiansreply that Louis XIV's activity, contrary to the program, reacted onLouis XVI. But why did it not react on Louis XIV or on Louis XV--whyshould it react just on Louis XVI? And what is the time limit for suchreactions? To these questions there are and can be no answers. Equallylittle does this view explain why for several centuries the collectivewill is not withdrawn from certain rulers and their heirs, and thensuddenly during a period of fifty years is transferred to theConvention, to the Directory, to Napoleon, to Alexander, to Louis XVIII,to Napoleon again, to Charles X, to Louis Philippe, to a Republicangovernment, and to Napoleon III. When explaining these rapid transfersof the people's will from one individual to another, especially in viewof international relations, conquests, and alliances, the historians areobliged to admit that some of these transfers are not normal delegationsof the people's will but are accidents dependent on cunning, onmistakes, on craft, or on the weakness of a diplomatist, a ruler, or aparty leader. So that the greater part of the events of history--civilwars, revolutions, and conquests--are presented by these historians notas the results of free transferences of the people's will, but asresults of the ill-directed will of one or more individuals, that is,once again, as usurpations of power. And so these historians also seeand admit historical events which are exceptions to the theory.These historians resemble a botanist who, having noticed that someplants grow from seeds producing two cotyledons, should insist that allthat grows does so by sprouting into two leaves, and that the palm, themushroom, and even the oak, which blossom into full growth and no longerresemble two leaves, are deviations from the theory.Historians of the third class assume that the will of the people istransferred to historic personages conditionally, but that theconditions are unknown to us. They say that historical personages havepower only because they fulfill the will of the people which has beendelegated to them.But in that case, if the force that moves nations lies not in thehistoric leaders but in the nations themselves, what significance havethose leaders?The leaders, these historians tell us, express the will of the people:the activity of the leaders represents the activity of the people.But in that case the question arises whether all the activity of theleaders serves as an expression of the people's will or only some partof it. If the whole activity of the leaders serves as the expression ofthe people's will, as some historians suppose, then all the details ofthe court scandals contained in the biographies of a Napoleon or aCatherine serve to express the life of the nation, which is evidentnonsense; but if it is only some particular side of the activity of anhistorical leader which serves to express the people's life, as otherso-called "philosophical" historians believe, then to determine whichside of the activity of a leader expresses the nation's life, we havefirst of all to know in what the nation's life consists.Met by this difficulty historians of that class devise some mostobscure, impalpable, and general abstraction which can cover allconceivable occurrences, and declare this abstraction to be the aim ofhumanity's movement. The most usual generalizations adopted by almostall the historians are: freedom, equality, enlightenment, progress,civilization, and culture. Postulating some generalization as the goalof the movement of humanity, the historians study the men of whom thegreatest number of monuments have remained: kings, ministers, generals,authors, reformers, popes, and journalists, to the extent to which intheir opinion these persons have promoted or hindered that abstraction.But as it is in no way proved that the aim of humanity does consist infreedom, equality, enlightenment, or civilization, and as the connectionof the people with the rulers and enlighteners of humanity is only basedon the arbitrary assumption that the collective will of the people isalways transferred to the men whom we have noticed, it happens that theactivity of the millions who migrate, burn houses, abandon agriculture,and destroy one another never is expressed in the account of theactivity of some dozen people who did not burn houses, practiceagriculture, or slay their fellow creatures.History proves this at every turn. Is the ferment of the peoples of thewest at the end of the eighteenth century and their drive eastwardexplained by the activity of Louis XIV, XV, and XVI, their mistressesand ministers, and by the lives of Napoleon, Rousseau, Diderot,Beaumarchais, and others?Is the movement of the Russian people eastward to Kazan and Siberiaexpressed by details of the morbid character of Ivan the Terrible and byhis correspondence with Kurbski?Is the movement of the peoples at the time of the Crusades explained bythe life and activity of the Godfreys and the Louis-es and their ladies?For us that movement of the peoples from west to east, without leaders,with a crowd of vagrants, and with Peter the Hermit, remainsincomprehensible. And yet more incomprehensible is the cessation of thatmovement when a rational and sacred aim for the Crusade--the deliveranceof Jerusalem--had been clearly defined by historic leaders. Popes,kings, and knights incited the peoples to free the Holy Land; but thepeople did not go, for the unknown cause which had previously impelledthem to go no longer existed. The history of the Godfreys and theMinnesingers can evidently not cover the life of the peoples. And thehistory of the Godfreys and the Minnesingers has remained the history ofGodfreys and Minnesingers, but the history of the life of the peoplesand their impulses has remained unknown.Still less does the history of authors and reformers explain to us thelife of the peoples.The history of culture explains to us the impulses and conditions oflife and thought of a writer or a reformer. We learn that Luther had ahot temper and said such and such things; we learn that Rousseau wassuspicious and wrote such and such books; but we do not learn why afterthe Reformation the peoples massacred one another, nor why during theFrench Revolution they guillotined one another.If we unite both these kinds of history, as is done by the newesthistorians, we shall have the history of monarchs and writers, but notthe history of the life of the peoples.CHAPTER VThe life of the nations is not contained in the lives of a few men, forthe connection between those men and the nations has not been found. Thetheory that this connection is based on the transference of thecollective will of a people to certain historical personages is anhypothesis unconfirmed by the experience of history.The theory of the transference of the collective will of the people tohistoric persons may perhaps explain much in the domain of jurisprudenceand be essential for its purposes, but in its application to history, assoon as revolutions, conquests, or civil wars occur--that is, as soon ashistory begins--that theory explains nothing.The theory seems irrefutable just because the act of transference of thepeople's will cannot be verified, for it never occurred.Whatever happens and whoever may stand at the head of affairs, thetheory can always say that such and such a person took the lead becausethe collective will was transferred to him.The replies this theory gives to historical questions are like thereplies of a man who, watching the movements of a herd of cattle andpaying no attention to the varying quality of the pasturage in differentparts of the field, or to the driving of the herdsman, should attributethe direction the herd takes to what animal happens to be at its head."The herd goes in that direction because the animal in front leads itand the collective will of all the other animals is vested in thatleader." This is what historians of the first class say--those whoassume the unconditional transference of the people's will."If the animals leading the herd change, this happens because thecollective will of all the animals is transferred from one leader toanother, according to whether the animal is or is not leading them inthe direction selected by the whole herd." Such is the reply historianswho assume that the collective will of the people is delegated to rulersunder conditions which they regard as known. (With this method ofobservation it often happens that the observer, influenced by thedirection he himself prefers, regards those as leaders who, owing to thepeople's change of direction, are no longer in front, but on one side,or even in the rear.)"If the animals in front are continually changing and the direction ofthe whole herd is constantly altered, this is because in order to followa given direction the animals transfer their will to the animals thathave attracted our attention, and to study the movements of the herd wemust watch the movements of all the prominent animals moving on allsides of the herd." So say the third class of historians who regard allhistorical persons, from monarchs to journalists, as the expression oftheir age.The theory of the transference of the will of the people to historicpersons is merely a paraphrase--a restatement of the question in otherwords.What causes historical events? Power. What is power? Power is thecollective will of the people transferred to one person. Under whatcondition is the will of the people delegated to one person? Oncondition that that person expresses the will of the whole people. Thatis, power is power: in other words, power is a word the meaning of whichwe do not understand.If the realm of human knowledge were confined to abstract reasoning,then having subjected to criticism the explanation of "power" thatjuridical science gives us, humanity would conclude that power is merelya word and has no real existence. But to understand phenomena man has,besides abstract reasoning, experience by which he verifies hisreflections. And experience tells us that power is not merely a word butan actually existing phenomenon.Not to speak of the fact that no description of the collective activityof men can do without the conception of power, the existence of power isproved both by history and by observing contemporary events.Whenever an event occurs a man appears or men appear, by whose will theevent seems to have taken place. Napoleon III issues a decree and theFrench go to Mexico. The King of Prussia and Bismarck issue decrees andan army enters Bohemia. Napoleon I issues a decree and an army entersRussia. Alexander I gives a command and the French submit to theBourbons. Experience shows us that whatever event occurs it is alwaysrelated to the will of one or of several men who have decreed it.The historians, in accord with the old habit of acknowledging divineintervention in human affairs, want to see the cause of events in theexpression of the will of someone endowed with power, but thatsupposition is not confirmed either by reason or by experience.On the one side reflection shows that the expression of a man's will--his words--are only part of the general activity expressed in an event,as for instance in a war or a revolution, and so without assuming anincomprehensible, supernatural force--a miracle--one cannot admit thatwords can be the immediate cause of the movements of millions of men. Onthe other hand, even if we admitted that words could be the cause ofevents, history shows that the expression of the will of historicalpersonages does not in most cases produce any effect, that is to say,their commands are often not executed, and sometimes the very oppositeof what they order occurs.Without admitting divine intervention in the affairs of humanity wecannot regard "power" as the cause of events.Power, from the standpoint of experience, is merely the relation thatexists between the expression of someone's will and the execution ofthat will by others.To explain the conditions of that relationship we must first establish aconception of the expression of will, referring it to man and not to theDeity.If the Deity issues a command, expresses His will, as ancient historytells us, the expression of that will is independent of time and is notcaused by anything, for the Divinity is not controlled by an event. Butspeaking of commands that are the expression of the will of men actingin time and in relation to one another, to explain the connection ofcommands with events we must restore: (1) the condition of all thattakes place: the continuity of movement in time both of the events andof the person who commands, and (2) the inevitability of the connectionbetween the person commanding and those who execute his command.CHAPTER VIOnly the expression of the will of the Deity, not dependent on time, canrelate to a whole series of events occurring over a period of years orcenturies, and only the Deity, independent of everything, can by Hissole will determine the direction of humanity's movement; but man actsin time and himself takes part in what occurs.Reinstating the first condition omitted, that of time, we see that nocommand can be executed without some preceding order having been givenrendering the execution of the last command possible.No command ever appears spontaneously, or itself covers a whole seriesof occurrences; but each command follows from another, and never refersto a whole series of events but always to one moment only of an event.When, for instance, we say that Napoleon ordered armies to go to war, wecombine in one simultaneous expression a whole series of consecutivecommands dependent one on another. Napoleon could not have commanded aninvasion of Russia and never did so. Today he ordered such and suchpapers to be written to Vienna, to Berlin, and to Petersburg; tomorrowsuch and such decrees and orders to the army, the fleet, thecommissariat, and so on and so on--millions of commands, which formed awhole series corresponding to a series of events which brought theFrench armies into Russia.If throughout his reign Napoleon gave commands concerning an invasion ofEngland and expended on no other undertaking so much time and effort,and yet during his whole reign never once attempted to execute thatdesign but undertook an expedition into Russia, with which country heconsidered it desirable to be in alliance (a conviction he repeatedlyexpressed)--this came about because his commands did not correspond tothe course of events in the first case, but did so correspond in thelatter.For an order to be certainly executed, it is necessary that a man shouldorder what can be executed. But to know what can and what cannot beexecuted is impossible, not only in the case of Napoleon's invasion ofRussia in which millions participated, but even in the simplest event,for in either case millions of obstacles may arise to prevent itsexecution. Every order executed is always one of an immense numberunexecuted. All the impossible orders inconsistent with the course ofevents remain unexecuted. Only the possible ones get linked up with aconsecutive series of commands corresponding to a series of events, andare executed.Our false conception that an event is caused by a command which precedesit is due to the fact that when the event has taken place and out ofthousands of others those few commands which were consistent with thatevent have been executed, we forget about the others that were notexecuted because they could not be. Apart from that, the chief source ofour error in this matter is due to the fact that in the historicalaccounts a whole series of innumerable, diverse, and petty events, suchfor instance as all those which led the French armies to Russia, isgeneralized into one event in accord with the result produced by thatseries of events, and corresponding with this generalization the wholeseries of commands is also generalized into a single expression of will.We say that Napoleon wished to invade Russia and invaded it. In realityin all Napoleon's activity we never find anything resembling anexpression of that wish, but find a series of orders, or expressions ofhis will, very variously and indefinitely directed. Amid a long seriesof unexecuted orders of Napoleon's one series, for the campaign of 1812,was carried out--not because those orders differed in any way from theother, unexecuted orders but because they coincided with the course ofevents that led the French army into Russia; just as in stencil workthis or that figure comes out not because the color was laid on fromthis side or in that way, but because it was laid on from all sides overthe figure cut in the stencil.So that examining the relation in time of the commands to the events, wefind that a command can never be the cause of the event, but that acertain definite dependence exists between the two.To understand in what this dependence consists it is necessary toreinstate another omitted condition of every command proceeding not fromthe Deity but from a man, which is, that the man who gives the commandhimself takes part in the event.This relation of the commander to those he commands is just what iscalled power. This relation consists in the following:For common action people always unite in certain combinations, in whichregardless of the difference of the aims set for the common action, therelation between those taking part in it is always the same.Men uniting in these combinations always assume such relations towardone another that the larger number take a more direct share, and thesmaller number a less direct share, in the collective action for whichthey have combined.Of all the combinations in which men unite for collective action one ofthe most striking and definite examples is an army.Every army is composed of lower grades of the service--the rank andfile--of whom there are always the greatest number; of the next highermilitary rank--corporals and noncommissioned officers of whom there arefewer, and of still-higher officers of whom there are still fewer, andso on to the highest military command which is concentrated in oneperson.A military organization may be quite correctly compared to a cone, ofwhich the base with the largest diameter consists of the rank and file;the next higher and smaller section of the cone consists of the nexthigher grades of the army, and so on to the apex, the point of whichwill represent the commander-in-chief.The soldiers, of whom there are the most, form the lower section of thecone and its base. The soldier himself does the stabbing, hacking,burning, and pillaging, and always receives orders for these actionsfrom men above him; he himself never gives an order. The noncommissionedofficers (of whom there are fewer) perform the action itself lessfrequently than the soldiers, but they already give commands. An officerstill less often acts directly himself, but commands still morefrequently. A general does nothing but command the troops, indicates theobjective, and hardly ever uses a weapon himself. The commander-in-chiefnever takes direct part in the action itself, but only gives generalorders concerning the movement of the mass of the troops. A similarrelation of people to one another is seen in every combination of menfor common activity--in agriculture, trade, and every administration.And so without particularly analyzing all the contiguous sections of acone and of the ranks of an army, or the ranks and positions in anyadministrative or public business whatever from the lowest to thehighest, we see a law by which men, to take associated action, combinein such relations that the more directly they participate in performingthe action the less they can command and the more numerous they are,while the less their direct participation in the action itself, the morethey command and the fewer of them there are; rising in this way fromthe lowest ranks to the man at the top, who takes the least direct sharein the action and directs his activity chiefly to commanding.This relation of the men who command to those they command is whatconstitutes the essence of the conception called power.Having restored the condition of time under which all events occur, wefind that a command is executed only when it is related to acorresponding series of events. Restoring the essential condition ofrelation between those who command and those who execute, we find thatby the very nature of the case those who command take the smallest partin the action itself and that their activity is exclusively directed tocommanding.CHAPTER VIIWhen an event is taking place people express their opinions and wishesabout it, and as the event results from the collective activity of manypeople, some one of the opinions or wishes expressed is sure to befulfilled if but approximately. When one of the opinions expressed isfulfilled, that opinion gets connected with the event as a commandpreceding it.Men are hauling a log. Each of them expresses his opinion as to how andwhere to haul it. They haul the log away, and it happens that this isdone as one of them said. He ordered it. There we have command and powerin their primary form. The man who worked most with his hands could notthink so much about what he was doing, or reflect on or command whatwould result from the common activity; while the man who commanded morewould evidently work less with his hands on account of his greaterverbal activity.When some larger concourse of men direct their activity to a common aimthere is a yet sharper division of those who, because their activity isgiven to directing and commanding, take less part in the direct work.When a man works alone he always has a certain set of reflections whichas it seems to him directed his past activity, justify his presentactivity, and guide him in planning his future actions. Just the same isdone by a concourse of people, allowing those who do not take a directpart in the activity to devise considerations, justifications, andsurmises concerning their collective activity.For reasons known or unknown to us the French began to drown and killone another. And corresponding to the event its justification appears inpeople's belief that this was necessary for the welfare of France, forliberty, and for equality. People ceased to kill one another, and thisevent was accompanied by its justification in the necessity for acentralization of power, resistance to Europe, and so on. Men went fromthe west to the east killing their fellow men, and the event wasaccompanied by phrases about the glory of France, the baseness ofEngland, and so on. History shows us that these justifications of theevents have no common sense and are all contradictory, as in the case ofkilling a man as the result of recognizing his rights, and the killingof millions in Russia for the humiliation of England. But thesejustifications have a very necessary significance in their own day.These justifications release those who produce the events from moralresponsibility. These temporary aims are like the broom fixed in frontof a locomotive to clear the snow from the rails in front: they clearmen's moral responsibilities from their path.Without such justification there would be no reply to the simplestquestion that presents itself when examining each historical event. Howis it that millions of men commit collective crimes--make war, commitmurder, and so on?With the present complex forms of political and social life in Europecan any event that is not prescribed, decreed, or ordered by monarchs,ministers, parliaments, or newspapers be imagined? Is there anycollective action which cannot find its justification in politicalunity, in patriotism, in the balance of power, or in civilization? Sothat every event that occurs inevitably coincides with some expressedwish and, receiving a justification, presents itself as the result ofthe will of one man or of several men.In whatever direction a ship moves, the flow of the waves it cuts willalways be noticeable ahead of it. To those on board the ship themovement of those waves will be the only perceptible motion.Only by watching closely moment by moment the movement of that flow andcomparing it with the movement of the ship do we convince ourselves thatevery bit of it is occasioned by the forward movement of the ship, andthat we were led into error by the fact that we ourselves wereimperceptibly moving.We see the same if we watch moment by moment the movement of historicalcharacters (that is, re-establish the inevitable condition of all thatoccurs--the continuity of movement in time) and do not lose sight of theessential connection of historical persons with the masses.When the ship moves in one direction there is one and the same waveahead of it, when it turns frequently the wave ahead of it also turnsfrequently. But wherever it may turn there always will be the waveanticipating its movement.Whatever happens it always appears that just that event was foreseen anddecreed. Wherever the ship may go, the rush of water which neitherdirects nor increases its movement foams ahead of it, and at a distanceseems to us not merely to move of itself but to govern the ship'smovement also.Examining only those expressions of the will of historical personswhich, as commands, were related to events, historians have assumed thatthe events depended on those commands. But examining the eventsthemselves and the connection in which the historical persons stood tothe people, we have found that they and their orders were dependent onevents. The incontestable proof of this deduction is that, however manycommands were issued, the event does not take place unless there areother causes for it, but as soon as an event occurs--be it what it may--then out of all the continually expressed wishes of different peoplesome will always be found which by their meaning and their time ofutterance are related as commands to the events.Arriving at this conclusion we can reply directly and positively tothese two essential questions of history:(1) What is power?(2) What force produces the movement of the nations?(1) Power is the relation of a given person to other individuals, inwhich the more this person expresses opinions, predictions, andjustifications of the collective action that is performed, the less ishis participation in that action.(2) The movement of nations is caused not by power, nor by intellectualactivity, nor even by a combination of the two as historians havesupposed, but by the activity of all the people who participate in theevents, and who always combine in such a way that those taking thelargest direct share in the event take on themselves the leastresponsibility and vice versa.Morally the wielder of power appears to cause the event; physically itis those who submit to the power. But as the moral activity isinconceivable without the physical, the cause of the event is neither inthe one nor in the other but in the union of the two.Or in other words, the conception of a cause is inapplicable to thephenomena we are examining.In the last analysis we reach the circle of infinity--that final limitto which in every domain of thought man's reason arrives if it is notplaying with the subject. Electricity produces heat, heat produceselectricity. Atoms attract each other and atoms repel one another.Speaking of the interaction of heat and electricity and of atoms, wecannot say why this occurs, and we say that it is so because it isinconceivable otherwise, because it must be so and that it is a law. Thesame applies to historical events. Why war and revolution occur we donot know. We only know that to produce the one or the other action,people combine in a certain formation in which they all take part, andwe say that this is so because it is unthinkable otherwise, or in otherwords that it is a law.CHAPTER VIIIIf history dealt only with external phenomena, the establishment of thissimple and obvious law would suffice and we should have finished ourargument. But the law of history relates to man. A particle of mattercannot tell us that it does not feel the law of attraction or repulsionand that that law is untrue, but man, who is the subject of history,says plainly: I am free and am therefore not subject to the law.The presence of the problem of man's free will, though unexpressed, isfelt at every step of history.All seriously thinking historians have involuntarily encountered thisquestion. All the contradictions and obscurities of history and thefalse path historical science has followed are due solely to the lack ofa solution of that question.If the will of every man were free, that is, if each man could act as hepleased, all history would be a series of disconnected incidents.If in a thousand years even one man in a million could act freely, thatis, as he chose, it is evident that one single free act of that man's inviolation of the laws governing human action would destroy thepossibility of the existence of any laws for the whole of humanity.If there be a single law governing the actions of men, free will cannotexist, for then man's will is subject to that law.In this contradiction lies the problem of free will, which from mostancient times has occupied the best human minds and from most ancienttimes has been presented in its whole tremendous significance.The problem is that regarding man as a subject of observation fromwhatever point of view--theological, historical, ethical, orphilosophic--we find a general law of necessity to which he (like allthat exists) is subject. But regarding him from within ourselves as whatwe are conscious of, we feel ourselves to be free.This consciousness is a source of self-cognition quite apart from andindependent of reason. Through his reason man observes himself, but onlythrough consciousness does he know himself.Apart from consciousness of self no observation or application of reasonis conceivable.To understand, observe, and draw conclusions, man must first of all beconscious of himself as living. A man is only conscious of himself as aliving being by the fact that he wills, that is, is conscious of hisvolition. But his will--which forms the essence of his life--manrecognizes (and can but recognize) as free.If, observing himself, man sees that his will is always directed by oneand the same law (whether he observes the necessity of taking food,using his brain, or anything else) he cannot recognize this never-varying direction of his will otherwise than as a limitation of it. Wereit not free it could not be limited. A man's will seems to him to belimited just because he is not conscious of it except as free.You say: I am not free. But I have lifted my hand and let it fall.Everyone understands that this illogical reply is an irrefutabledemonstration of freedom.That reply is the expression of a consciousness that is not subject toreason.If the consciousness of freedom were not a separate and independentsource of self-consciousness it would be subject to reasoning and toexperience, but in fact such subjection does not exist and isinconceivable.A series of experiments and arguments proves to every man that he, as anobject of observation, is subject to certain laws, and man submits tothem and never resists the laws of gravity or impermeability once he hasbecome acquainted with them. But the same series of experiments andarguments proves to him that the complete freedom of which he isconscious in himself is impossible, and that his every action depends onhis organization, his character, and the motives acting upon him; yetman never submits to the deductions of these experiments and arguments.Having learned from experiment and argument that a stone fallsdownwards, a man indubitably believes this and always expects the lawthat he has learned to be fulfilled.But learning just as certainly that his will is subject to laws, he doesnot and cannot believe this.However often experiment and reasoning may show a man that under thesame conditions and with the same character he will do the same thing asbefore, yet when under the same conditions and with the same characterhe approaches for the thousandth time the action that always ends in thesame way, he feels as certainly convinced as before the experiment thathe can act as he pleases. Every man, savage or sage, howeverincontestably reason and experiment may prove to him that it isimpossible to imagine two different courses of action in precisely thesame conditions, feels that without this irrational conception (whichconstitutes the essence of freedom) he cannot imagine life. He feelsthat however impossible it may be, it is so, for without this conceptionof freedom not only would he be unable to understand life, but he wouldbe unable to live for a single moment.He could not live, because all man's efforts, all his impulses to life,are only efforts to increase freedom. Wealth and poverty, fame andobscurity, power and subordination, strength and weakness, health anddisease, culture and ignorance, work and leisure, repletion and hunger,virtue and vice, are only greater or lesser degrees of freedom.A man having no freedom cannot be conceived of except as deprived oflife.If the conception of freedom appears to reason to be a senselesscontradiction like the possibility of performing two actions at one andthe same instant of time, or of an effect without a cause, that onlyproves that consciousness is not subject to reason.This unshakable, irrefutable consciousness of freedom, uncontrolled byexperiment or argument, recognized by all thinkers and felt by everyonewithout exception, this consciousness without which no conception of manis possible constitutes the other side of the question.Man is the creation of an all-powerful, all-good, and all-seeing God.What is sin, the conception of which arises from the consciousness ofman's freedom? That is a question for theology.The actions of men are subject to general immutable laws expressed instatistics. What is man's responsibility to society, the conception ofwhich results from the conception of freedom? That is a question forjurisprudence.Man's actions proceed from his innate character and the motives actingupon him. What is conscience and the perception of right and wrong inactions that follows from the consciousness of freedom? That is aquestion for ethics.Man in connection with the general life of humanity appears subject tolaws which determine that life. But the same man apart from thatconnection appears to be free. How should the past life of nations andof humanity be regarded--as the result of the free, or as the result ofthe constrained, activity of man? That is a question for history.Only in our self-confident day of the popularization of knowledge--thanks to that most powerful engine of ignorance, the diffusion ofprinted matter--has the question of the freedom of will been put on alevel on which the question itself cannot exist. In our time themajority of so-called advanced people--that is, the crowd ofignoramuses--have taken the work of the naturalists who deal with oneside of the question for a solution of the whole problem.They say and write and print that the soul and freedom do not exist, forthe life of man is expressed by muscular movements and muscularmovements are conditioned by the activity of the nerves; the soul andfree will do not exist because at an unknown period of time we sprangfrom the apes. They say this, not at all suspecting that thousands ofyears ago that same law of necessity which with such ardor they are nowtrying to prove by physiology and comparative zoology was not merelyacknowledged by all the religions and all the thinkers, but has neverbeen denied. They do not see that the role of the natural sciences inthis matter is merely to serve as an instrument for the illumination ofone side of it. For the fact that, from the point of view ofobservation, reason and the will are merely secretions of the brain, andthat man following the general law may have developed from lower animalsat some unknown period of time, only explains from a fresh side thetruth admitted thousands of years ago by all the religious andphilosophic theories--that from the point of view of reason man issubject to the law of necessity; but it does not advance by a hair'sbreadth the solution of the question, which has another, opposite, side,based on the consciousness of freedom.If men descended from the apes at an unknown period of time, that is ascomprehensible as that they were made from a handful of earth at acertain period of time (in the first case the unknown quantity is thetime, in the second case it is the origin); and the question of howman's consciousness of freedom is to be reconciled with the law ofnecessity to which he is subject cannot be solved by comparativephysiology and zoology, for in a frog, a rabbit, or an ape, we canobserve only the muscular nervous activity, but in man we observeconsciousness as well as the muscular and nervous activity.The naturalists and their followers, thinking they can solve thisquestion, are like plasterers set to plaster one side of the walls of achurch who, availing themselves of the absence of the chiefsuperintendent of the work, should in an access of zeal plaster over thewindows, icons, woodwork, and still unbuttressed walls, and should bedelighted that from their point of view as plasterers, everything is nowso smooth and regular.CHAPTER IXFor the solution of the question of free will or inevitability, historyhas this advantage over other branches of knowledge in which thequestion is dealt with, that for history this question does not refer tothe essence of man's free will but its manifestation in the past andunder certain conditions.In regard to this question, history stands to the other sciences asexperimental science stands to abstract science.The subject for history is not man's will itself but our presentation ofit.And so for history, the insoluble mystery presented by theincompatibility of free will and inevitability does not exist as it doesfor theology, ethics, and philosophy. History surveys a presentation ofman's life in which the union of these two contradictions has alreadytaken place.In actual life each historic event, each human action, is very clearlyand definitely understood without any sense of contradiction, althougheach event presents itself as partly free and partly compulsory.To solve the question of how freedom and necessity are combined and whatconstitutes the essence of these two conceptions, the philosophy ofhistory can and should follow a path contrary to that taken by othersciences. Instead of first defining the conceptions of freedom andinevitability in themselves, and then ranging the phenomena of lifeunder those definitions, history should deduce a definition of theconception of freedom and inevitability themselves from the immensequantity of phenomena of which it is cognizant and that always appeardependent on these two elements.Whatever presentation of the activity of many men or of an individual wemay consider, we always regard it as the result partly of man's freewill and partly of the law of inevitability.Whether we speak of the migration of the peoples and the incursions ofthe barbarians, or of the decrees of Napoleon III, or of someone'saction an hour ago in choosing one direction out of several for hiswalk, we are unconscious of any contradiction. The degree of freedom andinevitability governing the actions of these people is clearly definedfor us.Our conception of the degree of freedom often varies according todifferences in the point of view from which we regard the event, butevery human action appears to us as a certain combination of freedom andinevitability. In every action we examine we see a certain measure offreedom and a certain measure of inevitability. And always the morefreedom we see in any action the less inevitability do we perceive, andthe more inevitability the less freedom.The proportion of freedom to inevitability decreases and increasesaccording to the point of view from which the action is regarded, buttheir relation is always one of inverse proportion.A sinking man who clutches at another and drowns him; or a hungry motherexhausted by feeding her baby, who steals some food; or a man trained todiscipline who on duty at the word of command kills a defenseless man--seem less guilty, that is, less free and more subject to the law ofnecessity, to one who knows the circumstances in which these people wereplaced, and more free to one who does not know that the man was himselfdrowning, that the mother was hungry, that the soldier was in the ranks,and so on. Similarly a man who committed a murder twenty years ago andhas since lived peaceably and harmlessly in society seems less guiltyand his action more due to the law of inevitability, to someone whoconsiders his action after twenty years have elapsed than to one whoexamined it the day after it was committed. And in the same way everyaction of an insane, intoxicated, or highly excited man appears lessfree and more inevitable to one who knows the mental condition of himwho committed the action, and seems more free and less inevitable to onewho does not know it. In all these cases the conception of freedom isincreased or diminished and the conception of compulsion iscorrespondingly decreased or increased, according to the point of viewfrom which the action is regarded. So that the greater the conception ofnecessity the smaller the conception of freedom and vice versa.Religion, the common sense of mankind, the science of jurisprudence, andhistory itself understand alike this relation between necessity andfreedom.All cases without exception in which our conception of freedom andnecessity is increased and diminished depend on three considerations:(1) The relation to the external world of the man who commits the deeds.(2) His relation to time.(3) His relation to the causes leading to the action.The first consideration is the clearness of our perception of the man'srelation to the external world and the greater or lesser clearness ofour understanding of the definite position occupied by the man inrelation to everything coexisting with him. This is what makes itevident that a drowning man is less free and more subject to necessitythan one standing on dry ground, and that makes the actions of a manclosely connected with others in a thickly populated district, or of onebound by family, official, or business duties, seem certainly less freeand more subject to necessity than those of a man living in solitude andseclusion.If we consider a man alone, apart from his relation to everything aroundhim, each action of his seems to us free. But if we see his relation toanything around him, if we see his connection with anything whatever--with a man who speaks to him, a book he reads, the work on which he isengaged, even with the air he breathes or the light that falls on thethings about him--we see that each of these circumstances has aninfluence on him and controls at least some side of his activity. Andthe more we perceive of these influences the more our conception of hisfreedom diminishes and the more our conception of the necessity thatweighs on him increases.The second consideration is the more or less evident time relation ofthe man to the world and the clearness of our perception of the placethe man's action occupies in time. That is the ground which makes thefall of the first man, resulting in the production of the human race,appear evidently less free than a man's entry into marriage today. It isthe reason why the life and activity of people who lived centuries agoand are connected with me in time cannot seem to me as free as the lifeof a contemporary, the consequences of which are still unknown to me.The degree of our conception of freedom or inevitability depends in thisrespect on the greater or lesser lapse of time between the performanceof the action and our judgment of it.If I examine an act I performed a moment ago in approximately the samecircumstances as those I am in now, my action appears to me undoubtedlyfree. But if I examine an act performed a month ago, then being indifferent circumstances, I cannot help recognizing that if that act hadnot been committed much that resulted from it--good, agreeable, and evenessential--would not have taken place. If I reflect on an action stillmore remote, ten years ago or more, then the consequences of my actionare still plainer to me and I find it hard to imagine what would havehappened had that action not been performed. The farther I go back inmemory, or what is the same thing the farther I go forward in myjudgment, the more doubtful becomes my belief in the freedom of myaction.In history we find a very similar progress of conviction concerning thepart played by free will in the general affairs of humanity. Acontemporary event seems to us to be indubitably the doing of all theknown participants, but with a more remote event we already see itsinevitable results which prevent our considering anything else possible.And the farther we go back in examining events the less arbitrary dothey appear.The Austro-Prussian war appears to us undoubtedly the result of thecrafty conduct of Bismarck, and so on. The Napoleonic wars still seem tous, though already questionably, to be the outcome of their heroes'will. But in the Crusades we already see an event occupying its definiteplace in history and without which we cannot imagine the modern historyof Europe, though to the chroniclers of the Crusades that event appearedas merely due to the will of certain people. In regard to the migrationof the peoples it does not enter anyone's head today to suppose that therenovation of the European world depended on Attila's caprice. Thefarther back in history the object of our observation lies, the moredoubtful does the free will of those concerned in the event become andthe more manifest the law of inevitability.The third consideration is the degree to which we apprehend that endlesschain of causation inevitably demanded by reason, in which eachphenomenon comprehended, and therefore man's every action, must have itsdefinite place as a result of what has gone before and as a cause ofwhat will follow.The better we are acquainted with the physiological, psychological, andhistorical laws deduced by observation and by which man is controlled,and the more correctly we perceive the physiological, psychological, andhistorical causes of the action, and the simpler the action we areobserving and the less complex the character and mind of the man inquestion, the more subject to inevitability and the less free do ouractions and those of others appear.When we do not at all understand the cause of an action, whether acrime, a good action, or even one that is simply nonmoral, we ascribe agreater amount of freedom to it. In the case of a crime we most urgentlydemand the punishment for such an act; in the case of a virtuous act werate its merit most highly. In an indifferent case we recognize in itmore individuality, originality, and independence. But if even one ofthe innumerable causes of the act is known to us we recognize a certainelement of necessity and are less insistent on punishment for the crime,or the acknowledgment of the merit of the virtuous act, or the freedomof the apparently original action. That a criminal was reared among malefactors mitigates his fault in our eyes. The self-sacrifice of a fatheror mother, or self-sacrifice with the possibility of a reward, is morecomprehensible than gratuitous self-sacrifice, and therefore seems lessdeserving of sympathy and less the result of free will. The founder of asect or party, or an inventor, impresses us less when we know how or bywhat the way was prepared for his activity. If we have a large range ofexamples, if our observation is constantly directed to seeking thecorrelation of cause and effect in people's actions, their actionsappear to us more under compulsion and less free the more correctly weconnect the effects with the causes. If we examined simple actions andhad a vast number of such actions under observation, our conception oftheir inevitability would be still greater. The dishonest conduct of theson of a dishonest father, the misconduct of a woman who had fallen intobad company, a drunkard's relapse into drunkenness, and so on areactions that seem to us less free the better we understand their cause.If the man whose actions we are considering is on a very low stage ofmental development, like a child, a madman, or a simpleton--then,knowing the causes of the act and the simplicity of the character andintelligence in question, we see so large an element of necessity and solittle free will that as soon as we know the cause prompting the actionwe can foretell the result.On these three considerations alone is based the conception ofirresponsibility for crimes and the extenuating circumstances admittedby all legislative codes. The responsibility appears greater or lessaccording to our greater or lesser knowledge of the circumstances inwhich the man was placed whose action is being judged, and according tothe greater or lesser interval of time between the commission of theaction and its investigation, and according to the greater or lesserunderstanding of the causes that led to the action.CHAPTER XThus our conception of free will and inevitability gradually diminishesor increases according to the greater or lesser connection with theexternal world, the greater or lesser remoteness of time, and thegreater or lesser dependence on the causes in relation to which wecontemplate a man's life.So that if we examine the case of a man whose connection with theexternal world is well known, where the time between the action and itsexamination is great, and where the causes of the action are mostaccessible, we get the conception of a maximum of inevitability and aminimum of free will. If we examine a man little dependent on externalconditions, whose action was performed very recently, and the causes ofwhose action are beyond our ken, we get the conception of a minimum ofinevitability and a maximum of freedom.In neither case--however we may change our point of view, however plainwe may make to ourselves the connection between the man and the externalworld, however inaccessible it may be to us, however long or short theperiod of time, however intelligible or incomprehensible the causes ofthe action may be--can we ever conceive either complete freedom orcomplete necessity.(1) To whatever degree we may imagine a man to be exempt from theinfluence of the external world, we never get a conception of freedom inspace. Every human action is inevitably conditioned by what surroundshim and by his own body. I lift my arm and let it fall. My action seemsto me free; but asking myself whether I could raise my arm in everydirection, I see that I raised it in the direction in which there wasleast obstruction to that action either from things around me or fromthe construction of my own body. I chose one out of all the possibledirections because in it there were fewest obstacles. For my action tobe free it was necessary that it should encounter no obstacles. Toconceive of a man being free we must imagine him outside space, which isevidently impossible.(2) However much we approximate the time of judgment to the time of thedeed, we never get a conception of freedom in time. For if I examine anaction committed a second ago I must still recognize it as not beingfree, for it is irrevocably linked to the moment at which it wascommitted. Can I lift my arm? I lift it, but ask myself: could I haveabstained from lifting my arm at the moment that has already passed? Toconvince myself of this I do not lift it the next moment. But I am notnow abstaining from doing so at the first moment when I asked thequestion. Time has gone by which I could not detain, the arm I thenlifted is no longer the same as the arm I now refrain from lifting, noris the air in which I lifted it the same that now surrounds me. Themoment in which the first movement was made is irrevocable, and at thatmoment I could make only one movement, and whatever movement I madewould be the only one. That I did not lift my arm a moment later doesnot prove that I could have abstained from lifting it then. And since Icould make only one movement at that single moment of time, it could nothave been any other. To imagine it as free, it is necessary to imagineit in the present, on the boundary between the past and the future--thatis, outside time, which is impossible.(3) However much the difficulty of understanding the causes may beincreased, we never reach a conception of complete freedom, that is, anabsence of cause. However inaccessible to us may be the cause of theexpression of will in any action, our own or another's, the first demandof reason is the assumption of and search for a cause, for without acause no phenomenon is conceivable. I raise my arm to perform an actionindependently of any cause, but my wish to perform an action without acause is the cause of my action.But even if--imagining a man quite exempt from all influences, examiningonly his momentary action in the present, unevoked by any cause--we wereto admit so infinitely small a remainder of inevitability as equaledzero, we should even then not have arrived at the conception of completefreedom in man, for a being uninfluenced by the external world, standingoutside of time and independent of cause, is no longer a man.In the same way we can never imagine the action of a man quite devoid offreedom and entirely subject to the law of inevitability.(1) However we may increase our knowledge of the conditions of space inwhich man is situated, that knowledge can never be complete, for thenumber of those conditions is as infinite as the infinity of space. Andtherefore so long as not all the conditions influencing men are defined,there is no complete inevitability but a certain measure of freedomremains.(2) However we may prolong the period of time between the action we areexamining and the judgment upon it, that period will be finite, whiletime is infinite, and so in this respect too there can never be absoluteinevitability.(3) However accessible may be the chain of causation of any action, weshall never know the whole chain since it is endless, and so again wenever reach absolute inevitability.But besides this, even if, admitting the remaining minimum of freedom toequal zero, we assumed in some given case--as for instance in that of adying man, an unborn babe, or an idiot--complete absence of freedom, byso doing we should destroy the very conception of man in the case we areexamining, for as soon as there is no freedom there is also no man. Andso the conception of the action of a man subject solely to the law ofinevitability without any element of freedom is just as impossible asthe conception of a man's completely free action.And so to imagine the action of a man entirely subject to the law ofinevitability without any freedom, we must assume the knowledge of aninfinite number of space relations, an infinitely long period of time,and an infinite series of causes.To imagine a man perfectly free and not subject to the law ofinevitability, we must imagine him all alone, beyond space, beyond time,and free from dependence on cause.In the first case, if inevitability were possible without freedom weshould have reached a definition of inevitability by the laws ofinevitability itself, that is, a mere form without content.In the second case, if freedom were possible without inevitability weshould have arrived at unconditioned freedom beyond space, time, andcause, which by the fact of its being unconditioned and unlimited wouldbe nothing, or mere content without form.We should in fact have reached those two fundamentals of which man'swhole outlook on the universe is constructed--the incomprehensibleessence of life, and the laws defining that essence.Reason says: (1) space with all the forms of matter that give itvisibility is infinite, and cannot be imagined otherwise. (2) Time isinfinite motion without a moment of rest and is unthinkable otherwise.(3) The connection between cause and effect has no beginning and canhave no end.Consciousness says: (1) I alone am, and all that exists is but me,consequently I include space. (2) I measure flowing time by the fixedmoment of the present in which alone I am conscious of myself as living,consequently I am outside time. (3) I am beyond cause, for I feel myselfto be the cause of every manifestation of my life.Reason gives expression to the laws of inevitability. Consciousnessgives expression to the essence of freedom.Freedom not limited by anything is the essence of life, in man'sconsciousness. Inevitability without content is man's reason in itsthree forms.Freedom is the thing examined. Inevitability is what examines. Freedomis the content. Inevitability is the form.Only by separating the two sources of cognition, related to one anotheras form to content, do we get the mutually exclusive and separatelyincomprehensible conceptions of freedom and inevitability.Only by uniting them do we get a clear conception of man's life.Apart from these two concepts which in their union mutually define oneanother as form and content, no conception of life is possible.All that we know of the life of man is merely a certain relation of freewill to inevitability, that is, of consciousness to the laws of reason.All that we know of the external world of nature is only a certainrelation of the forces of nature to inevitability, or of the essence oflife to the laws of reason.The great natural forces lie outside us and we are not conscious ofthem; we call those forces gravitation, inertia, electricity, animalforce, and so on, but we are conscious of the force of life in man andwe call that freedom.But just as the force of gravitation, incomprehensible in itself butfelt by every man, is understood by us only to the extent to which weknow the laws of inevitability to which it is subject (from the firstknowledge that all bodies have weight, up to Newton's law), so too theforce of free will, incomprehensible in itself but of which everyone isconscious, is intelligible to us only in as far as we know the laws ofinevitability to which it is subject (from the fact that every man dies,up to the knowledge of the most complex economic and historic laws).All knowledge is merely a bringing of this essence of life under thelaws of reason.Man's free will differs from every other force in that man is directlyconscious of it, but in the eyes of reason it in no way differs from anyother force. The forces of gravitation, electricity, or chemicalaffinity are only distinguished from one another in that they aredifferently defined by reason. Just so the force of man's free will isdistinguished by reason from the other forces of nature only by thedefinition reason gives it. Freedom, apart from necessity, that is,apart from the laws of reason that define it, differs in no way fromgravitation, or heat, or the force that makes things grow; for reason,it is only a momentary undefinable sensation of life.And as the undefinable essence of the force moving the heavenly bodies,the undefinable essence of the forces of heat and electricity, or ofchemical affinity, or of the vital force, forms the content ofastronomy, physics, chemistry, botany, zoology, and so on, just in thesame way does the force of free will form the content of history. Butjust as the subject of every science is the manifestation of thisunknown essence of life while that essence itself can only be thesubject of metaphysics, even the manifestation of the force of free willin human beings in space, in time, and in dependence on cause forms thesubject of history, while free will itself is the subject ofmetaphysics.In the experimental sciences what we know we call the laws ofinevitability, what is unknown to us we call vital force. Vital force isonly an expression for the unknown remainder over and above what we knowof the essence of life.So also in history what is known to us we call laws of inevitability,what is unknown we call free will. Free will is for history only anexpression for the unknown remainder of what we know about the laws ofhuman life.CHAPTER XIHistory examines the manifestations of man's free will in connectionwith the external world in time and in dependence on cause, that is, itdefines this freedom by the laws of reason, and so history is a scienceonly in so far as this free will is defined by those laws.The recognition of man's free will as something capable of influencinghistorical events, that is, as not subject to laws, is the same forhistory as the recognition of a free force moving the heavenly bodieswould be for astronomy.That assumption would destroy the possibility of the existence of laws,that is, of any science whatever. If there is even a single body movingfreely, then the laws of Kepler and Newton are negatived and noconception of the movement of the heavenly bodies any longer exists. Ifany single action is due to free will, then not a single historical lawcan exist, nor any conception of historical events.For history, lines exist of the movement of human wills, one end ofwhich is hidden in the unknown but at the other end of which aconsciousness of man's will in the present moves in space, time, anddependence on cause.The more this field of motion spreads out before our eyes, the moreevident are the laws of that movement. To discover and define those lawsis the problem of history.From the standpoint from which the science of history now regards itssubject on the path it now follows, seeking the causes of events inman's freewill, a scientific enunciation of those laws is impossible,for however man's free will may be restricted, as soon as we recognizeit as a force not subject to law, the existence of law becomesimpossible.Only by reducing this element of free will to the infinitesimal, thatis, by regarding it as an infinitely small quantity, can we convinceourselves of the absolute inaccessibility of the causes, and theninstead of seeking causes, history will take the discovery of laws asits problem.The search for these laws has long been begun and the new methods ofthought which history must adopt are being worked out simultaneouslywith the self-destruction toward which--ever dissecting and dissectingthe causes of phenomena--the old method of history is moving.All human sciences have traveled along that path. Arriving atinfinitesimals, mathematics, the most exact of sciences, abandons theprocess of analysis and enters on the new process of the integration ofunknown, infinitely small, quantities. Abandoning the conception ofcause, mathematics seeks law, that is, the property common to allunknown, infinitely small, elements.In another form but along the same path of reflection the other scienceshave proceeded. When Newton enunciated the law of gravity he did not saythat the sun or the earth had a property of attraction; he said that allbodies from the largest to the smallest have the property of attractingone another, that is, leaving aside the question of the cause of themovement of the bodies, he expressed the property common to all bodiesfrom the infinitely large to the infinitely small. The same is done bythe natural sciences: leaving aside the question of cause, they seek forlaws. History stands on the same path. And if history has for its objectthe study of the movement of the nations and of humanity and not thenarration of episodes in the lives of individuals, it too, setting asidethe conception of cause, should seek the laws common to all theinseparably interconnected infinitesimal elements of free will.CHAPTER XIIFrom the time the law of Copernicus was discovered and proved, the mererecognition of the fact that it was not the sun but the earth that movessufficed to destroy the whole cosmography of the ancients. By disprovingthat law it might have been possible to retain the old conception of themovements of the bodies, but without disproving it, it would seemimpossible to continue studying the Ptolemaic worlds. But even after thediscovery of the law of Copernicus the Ptolemaic worlds were stillstudied for a long time.From the time the first person said and proved that the number of birthsor of crimes is subject to mathematical laws, and that this or that modeof government is determined by certain geographical and economicconditions, and that certain relations of population to soil producemigrations of peoples, the foundations on which history had been builtwere destroyed in their essence.By refuting these new laws the former view of history might have beenretained; but without refuting them it would seem impossible to continuestudying historic events as the results of man's free will. For if acertain mode of government was established or certain migrations ofpeoples took place in consequence of such and such geographic,ethnographic, or economic conditions, then the free will of thoseindividuals who appear to us to have established that mode of governmentor occasioned the migrations can no longer be regarded as the cause.And yet the former history continues to be studied side by side with thelaws of statistics, geography, political economy, comparative philology,and geology, which directly contradict its assumptions.The struggle between the old views and the new was long and stubbornlyfought out in physical philosophy. Theology stood on guard for the oldviews and accused the new of violating revelation. But when truthconquered, theology established itself just as firmly on the newfoundation.Just as prolonged and stubborn is the struggle now proceeding betweenthe old and the new conception of history, and theology in the same waystands on guard for the old view, and accuses the new view of subvertingrevelation.In the one case as in the other, on both sides the struggle provokespassion and stifles truth. On the one hand there is fear and regret forthe loss of the whole edifice constructed through the ages, on the otheris the passion for destruction.To the men who fought against the rising truths of physical philosophy,it seemed that if they admitted that truth it would destroy faith inGod, in the creation of the firmament, and in the miracle of Joshua theson of Nun. To the defenders of the laws of Copernicus and Newton, toVoltaire for example, it seemed that the laws of astronomy destroyedreligion, and he utilized the law of gravitation as a weapon againstreligion.Just so it now seems as if we have only to admit the law ofinevitability, to destroy the conception of the soul, of good and evil,and all the institutions of state and church that have been built up onthose conceptions.So too, like Voltaire in his time, uninvited defenders of the law ofinevitability today use that law as a weapon against religion, thoughthe law of inevitability in history, like the law of Copernicus inastronomy, far from destroying, even strengthens the foundation on whichthe institutions of state and church are erected.As in the question of astronomy then, so in the question of history now,the whole difference of opinion is based on the recognition ornonrecognition of something absolute, serving as the measure of visiblephenomena. In astronomy it was the immovability of the earth, in historyit is the independence of personality--free will.As with astronomy the difficulty of recognizing the motion of the earthlay in abandoning the immediate sensation of the earth's fixity and ofthe motion of the planets, so in history the difficulty of recognizingthe subjection of personality to the laws of space, time, and cause liesin renouncing the direct feeling of the independence of one's ownpersonality. But as in astronomy the new view said: "It is true that wedo not feel the movement of the earth, but by admitting its immobilitywe arrive at absurdity, while by admitting its motion (which we do notfeel) we arrive at laws," so also in history the new view says: "It istrue that we are not conscious of our dependence, but by admitting ourfree will we arrive at absurdity, while by admitting our dependence onthe external world, on time, and on cause, we arrive at laws."In the first case it was necessary to renounce the consciousness of anunreal immobility in space and to recognize a motion we did not feel; inthe present case it is similarly necessary to renounce a freedom thatdoes not exist, and to recognize a dependence of which we are notconscious.End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of War and Peace, by Leo Tolstoy*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WAR AND PEACE ******** This file should be named 2600-8.txt or 2600-8.zip ***** This andall associated files of various formats will be found in:http://www.gutenberg.org/2/6/0/2600/An Anonymous Volunteer, and David WidgerUpdated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will berenamed.Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no oneowns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation (andyou!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without permissionand without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules, set forth in theGeneral Terms of Use part of this license, apply to copying anddistributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect thePROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project Gutenberg is aregistered trademark, and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks,unless you receive specific permission.  If you do not charge anythingfor copies of this eBook, complying with the rules is very easy.  Youmay use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivativeworks, reports, performances and research.  They may be modified andprinted and given away--you may do practically ANYTHING with publicdomain eBooks.  Redistribution is subject to the trademark license,especially commercial redistribution.*** START: FULL LICENSE ***THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOUDISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORKTo protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the freedistribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work (orany other work associated in any way with the phrase "ProjectGutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full ProjectGutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online athttp://gutenberg.org/license).Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tmelectronic works1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tmelectronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree toand accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by allthe terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroyall copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a ProjectGutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by theterms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person orentity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only beused on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people whoagree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a fewthings that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic workseven without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  Seeparagraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with ProjectGutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreementand help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronicworks.  See paragraph 1.E below.1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("theFoundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection ofProject Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual worksin the collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If anindividual work is in the public domain in the United States and you arelocated in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent youfrom copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creatingderivative works based on the work as long as all references to ProjectGutenberg are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support theProject Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronicworks by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance withthe terms of this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm nameassociated with the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of thisagreement by keeping this work in the same format with its attached fullProject Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge withothers.1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also governwhat you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are ina constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, checkthe laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreementbefore downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing orcreating derivative works based on this work or any other ProjectGutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerningthe copyright status of any work in any country outside the UnitedStates.1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediateaccess to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominentlywhenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which thephrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "ProjectGutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,copied or distributed:This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with almostno restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use itunder the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with thiseBook or online at www.gutenberg.org1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derivedfrom the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it isposted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copiedand distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any feesor charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a workwith the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on thework, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and theProject Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or1.E.9.1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is postedwith the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distributionmust comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additionalterms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linkedto the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with thepermission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tmLicense terms from this work, or any files containing a part of thiswork or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute thiselectronic work, or any part of this electronic work, withoutprominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 withactive links or immediate access to the full terms of the ProjectGutenberg-tm License.1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including anyword processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to ordistribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official versionposted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense tothe user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means ofobtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "PlainVanilla ASCII" or other form.  Any alternate format must include thefull Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm worksunless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providingaccess to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works providedthat- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from theuse of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method youalready use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is owed to theowner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has agreed to donateroyalties under this paragraph to the Project Gutenberg Literary ArchiveFoundation.  Royalty payments must be paid within 60 days following eachdate on which you prepare (or are legally required to prepare) yourperiodic tax returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as suchand sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at theaddress specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to theProject Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies youin writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he does notagree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm License.  You mustrequire such a user to return or destroy all copies of the workspossessed in a physical medium and discontinue all use of and all accessto other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm works.- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of anymoney paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in theelectronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days ofreceipt of the work.- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for freedistribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tmelectronic work or group of works on different terms than are set forthin this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from both theProject Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael Hart, theowner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the Foundation asset forth in Section 3 below.1.F.1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerableeffort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofreadpublic domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm collection.Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works, and themedium on which they may be stored, may contain "Defects," such as, butnot limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or corrupt data, transcriptionerrors, a copyright or other intellectual property infringement, adefective or damaged disk or other medium, a computer virus, or computercodes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Rightof Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the ProjectGutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the ProjectGutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a ProjectGutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim allliability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal fees.YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT LIABILITY,BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE PROVIDED INPARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE TRADEMARK OWNER, ANDANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE LIABLE TO YOU FORACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGESEVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover adefect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you canreceive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending awritten explanation to the person you received the work from.  If youreceived the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium withyour written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you withthe defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of arefund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entityproviding it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity toreceive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copyis also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without furtheropportunities to fix the problem.1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forthin paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHERWARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TOWARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain impliedwarranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates thelaw of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall beinterpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted bythe applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of anyprovision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, thetrademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyoneproviding copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordancewith this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you door cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tmwork, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to anyProject Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tmProject Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution ofelectronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computersincluding obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It existsbecause of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations frompeople in all walks of life.Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with theassistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm'sgoals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will remainfreely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the ProjectGutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secureand permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations. Tolearn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation andhow your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4 and theFoundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary ArchiveFoundationThe Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the stateof Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal RevenueService.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification number is64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted athttp://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project GutenbergLiterary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extentpermitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scatteredthroughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, emailbusiness@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contactinformation can be found at the Foundation's web site and official pageat http://pglaf.orgFor additional contact information: Dr. Gregory B. Newby Chief Executiveand Director gbnewby@pglaf.orgSection 4.  Information about Donations to the Project GutenbergLiterary Archive FoundationProject Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide spreadpublic support and donations to carry out its mission of increasing thenumber of public domain and licensed works that can be freelydistributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest array ofequipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations ($1 to$5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt status withthe IRS.The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulatingcharities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the UnitedStates.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes aconsiderable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep upwith these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations wherewe have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To SENDDONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular statevisit http://pglaf.orgWhile we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where wehave not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibitionagainst accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states whoapproach us with offers to donate.International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make anystatements concerning tax treatment of donations received from outsidethe United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donationmethods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other waysincluding checks, online payments and credit card donations. To donate,please visit: http://pglaf.org/donateSection 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronicworks.Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tmconcept of a library of electronic works that could be freely sharedwith anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed ProjectGutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printededitions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S. unlessa copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily keep eBooksin compliance with any particular paper edition.Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:http://www.gutenberg.orgThis Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm, includinghow to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary ArchiveFoundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to subscribe toour email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.